A database is a shared collection of logically related data and a description of this data, designed to meet the information needs of an organization.

A database is organized so that information can easily be accessed, managed, and updated.

The system catalog, also called metadata, provides the description of data to enable program-data independence.

File-based systems are collections of application programs that perform services for end-users, where each program defines and manages its own data.

File-based systems can lack efficient access, have no direct support for queries, and do not ensure durability.

Drawbacks of file-based systems include data redundancy, inconsistency, difficulty in accessing data, and data isolation.

Integrity constraints in file-based systems become part of program code, making it hard to add new constraints.

A table is a group of related records in a database.

A field is a category of information displayed in columns.

A record is a group of related fields.

A primary key is a field value that is unique to a record.

A DBMS is a set of computer programs that controls the creation, maintenance, and use of a database.

A DBMS enables users to define, create, maintain, and control access to the database.

A database application program interacts with a database by issuing requests, such as SQL statements, to the DBMS.

Benefits of DBMSs include data independence, efficient data access, reduced application development time, and data integrity and security.

The database approach includes controlled access through a security system, an integrity system, a concurrency control system, and a recovery control system.

Advantages of DBMSs include control of data redundancy, data consistency, sharing of data, improved security, and increased concurrency.

The Three-Schema Architecture defines DBMS schemas at three levels: internal, conceptual, and external.

The internal schema describes physical storage structures and access paths.

The conceptual schema describes the structure and constraints for the whole database for a community of users.

External schemas describe the various user views.

Roles in the DBMS environment include Data Administrator, Database Administrator, Database Designers, Application Programmers, and End Users.

High-level or non-procedural languages like SQL are set-oriented and specify what data to retrieve rather than how.

Low-level or procedural languages are record-at-a-time and specify how to retrieve data, including constructs such as looping.

Drawbacks of DBMSs include complexity, size, cost of DBMS, additional hardware costs, and higher impact of a failure.

Major DBMSs today include Oracle, IBM DB2, Microsoft SQL Server, Sybase, Informix, PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Microsoft Access.

A data model is a collection of high-level description concepts for describing data, hiding low-level storage details.

A data model is a set of concepts to describe the structure of a database and certain constraints the database should obey.

A schema is a description of a particular collection of data using a given data model.

Conceptual data models provide concepts close to the way many users perceive data, using entities, attributes, and relationships.

An entity represents a real-world object or concept, such as a student or lecturer.

An attribute represents some property of interest that further describes an entity.

A relationship among two entities represents an association between two entities, such as a teaches relationship.

Physical data models provide concepts that describe details of how data is stored in the computer.

Implementation data models fall between conceptual and physical models, balancing user views with some computer storage details.

The relational data model is a widely-used implementation data model.

The relational database model achieves structural independence, allowing one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many associations.

The relational database model has a very powerful and flexible query capability.

A relation is a table with columns and rows, applying only to the logical structure of the database.

An attribute is a named column of a relation.

A domain is the set of allowable values for one or more attributes.

A tuple is a row of a relation.

Degree is the number of attributes in a relation.

Cardinality is the number of tuples in a relation.

A relational database is a collection of normalized relations with distinct relation names.

Each cell of a relation contains exactly one atomic value.

Each attribute in a relation has a distinct name.

Values of an attribute are all from the same domain.

Each tuple in a relation is distinct; there are no duplicate tuples.

The order of attributes in a relation has no significance.

The order of tuples in a relation has no significance, theoretically.

A superkey is an attribute, or set of attributes, that uniquely identifies a tuple within a relation.

A candidate key is a superkey such that no proper subset is a superkey within the relation.

A primary key is a candidate key selected to identify tuples uniquely within a relation.

Alternate keys are candidate keys that are not selected to be the primary key.

A foreign key is an attribute, or set of attributes, within one relation that matches a candidate key of some relation.

Referential integrity is a constraint involving two relations: the referencing relation and the referenced relation.

Tuples in the referencing relation have foreign key attributes that reference the primary key attributes of the referenced relation.

The value in a foreign key column can be either an existing primary key value of the referenced relation or a null.

Semantic integrity constraints are based on application semantics and cannot be expressed by the model itself.

Update operations on relations include INSERT, DELETE, and MODIFY.

Integrity constraints should not be violated by update operations.

In case of integrity violation, actions include REJECT, CASCADE, SET NULL, or a user-specified error-correction routine.

SQL stands for Structured Query Language.

SQL is a transform-oriented language with two major components: DDL and DML.

DDL stands for Data Definition Language and is used for defining database structure.

DML stands for Data Manipulation Language and is used for retrieving and updating data.

SQL is non-procedural: you specify what information you require rather than how to get it.

SQL is essentially free-format and relatively easy to learn.

An SQL statement consists of reserved words and user-defined words.

Reserved words are a fixed part of SQL, must be spelt exactly as required, and cannot be split across lines.

User-defined words are made up by the user and represent names of database objects such as relations, columns, and views.

Most components of an SQL statement are case insensitive, except for literal character data.

All non-numeric literals must be enclosed in single quotes, such as 'London'.

All numeric literals must not be enclosed in quotes, such as 650.00.

SQL DDL allows database objects such as schemas, domains, tables, and indexes to be created and destroyed.

Main SQL DDL statements include CREATE/ALTER/DROP SCHEMA, DOMAIN, and TABLE.

Many DBMSs also provide CREATE INDEX and DROP INDEX.

The CREATE TABLE statement creates a table with one or more columns of the specified dataType.

With NOT NULL, the system rejects any attempt to insert a null in the column.

A DEFAULT value can be specified for a column.

Primary keys should always be specified as NOT NULL.

The FOREIGN KEY clause specifies a foreign key along with the referential action.

ISO SQL data types include BOOLEAN, CHAR, VARCHAR, BIT, NUMERIC, DECIMAL, INTEGER, FLOAT, REAL, DOUBLE PRECISION, DATETIME, TIMESTAMP, INTERVAL, and large objects.

Domain constraints can be defined using CHECK, such as maritalStatus VARCHAR(8) CHECK (maritalStatus IN ('Married', 'Single', 'Divorced', 'Widow')).

A primary key of a table must contain a unique, non-null value for each row.

There can only be one PRIMARY KEY clause per table.

Uniqueness for alternate keys can be ensured using UNIQUE.

A foreign key is a column or set of columns that links each row in a child table to a row of a parent table containing a matching primary key.

Referential integrity means that if a foreign key contains a value, that value must refer to an existing row in the parent table.

Any INSERT/UPDATE attempting to create an FK value in a child table without a matching CK value in the parent is rejected.

Referential actions for ON UPDATE and ON DELETE include CASCADE, SET NULL, SET DEFAULT, and NO ACTION.

CASCADE updates or deletes matching rows in the child table in a cascading manner.

SET NULL updates or deletes a row from the parent and sets the FK column(s) in the child to NULL.

SET DEFAULT updates or deletes a row from the parent and sets each component of the FK in the child to a specified default.

NO ACTION rejects the update or delete from the parent and is the default.

ALTER TABLE can add a new column, drop a column, add or drop a table constraint, and set or drop a default for a column.

DROP TABLE removes the named table and all rows within it.

With RESTRICT, SQL does not allow dropping a table if other objects depend on it.

With CASCADE, SQL drops all dependent objects along with the table.

DML statements consist of four main commands: SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE.

SELECT is used to query data in the database.

INSERT is used to insert data into a table.

UPDATE is used to update data in a table.

DELETE is used to delete data from a table.

The INSERT statement syntax is: INSERT INTO TableName [(columnList)] VALUES (dataValueList).

In INSERT, columnList is optional; if omitted, SQL assumes a list of all columns in their original CREATE TABLE order.

Any columns omitted in INSERT must have been declared as NULL when the table was created, unless DEFAULT was specified.

In INSERT, the dataValueList must match the columnList in number, position, and compatible data types.

The INSERT ... SELECT form allows multiple rows to be copied from one or more tables to another.

The UPDATE statement syntax is: UPDATE TableName SET columnName1 = dataValue1 [, columnName2 = dataValue2...] [WHERE searchCondition].

In UPDATE, TableName is the name of a base table.

In UPDATE, the SET clause specifies names of one or more columns that are to be updated.

In UPDATE, the WHERE clause is optional; if omitted, named columns are updated for all rows in the table.

In UPDATE, if WHERE is specified, only those rows that satisfy the searchCondition are updated.

In UPDATE, new data values must be compatible with the data type for the corresponding column.

Example: UPDATE Staff SET salary = salary*1.03 gives all staff a 3% pay increase.

Example: UPDATE Staff SET salary = salary*1.05 WHERE position = 'Manager' gives all Managers a 5% pay increase.

Example: UPDATE Staff SET position = 'Manager', salary = 18000 WHERE staffNo = 'SG14' updates multiple columns.

The DELETE statement syntax is: DELETE FROM TableName [WHERE searchCondition].

In DELETE, TableName can be the name of a base table or an updatable view.

In DELETE, searchCondition is optional; if omitted, all rows are deleted from the table.

In DELETE, omitting the WHERE clause does not delete the table itself.

In DELETE, if searchCondition is specified, only those rows that satisfy the condition are deleted.

Example: DELETE FROM Viewing WHERE propertyNo = 'PG4' deletes all viewings that relate to property PG4.

Example: DELETE FROM Viewing deletes all records from the Viewing table.

The SELECT statement syntax is: SELECT [DISTINCT | ALL] {* | [columnExpression [AS newName]] [,...]} FROM TableName [alias] [, ...] [WHERE condition] [GROUP BY columnList] [HAVING condition] [ORDER BY columnList].

FROM specifies the table(s) to be used.

WHERE filters rows.

GROUP BY forms groups of rows with the same column value.

HAVING filters groups subject to some condition.

SELECT specifies which columns are to appear in the output.

ORDER BY specifies the order of the output.

The order of the clauses cannot be changed.

Only SELECT and FROM are mandatory in a SELECT statement.

The asterisk (*) can be used as an abbreviation for 'all columns'.

DISTINCT eliminates duplicate rows from the result.

Calculated fields can be created in the SELECT list, such as salary/12.

The AS clause can be used to name a calculated column, such as salary/12 AS monthlySalary.

A comparison search condition uses operators such as >, <, =, >=, <=, and <>.

A compound comparison search condition uses AND, OR, and NOT.

The BETWEEN test includes the endpoints of the range, and there is a negated version NOT BETWEEN.

The IN operator tests set membership, and there is a negated version NOT IN.

Pattern matching uses LIKE, with % representing a sequence of zero or more characters and _ representing any single character.

LIKE '%Glasgow%' means a sequence of characters of any length containing 'Glasgow'.

NULL is tested explicitly using IS NULL, and the negated version is IS NOT NULL.

ORDER BY arranges output in ascending (ASC) or descending (DESC) order.

Multiple column ordering can be specified, such as ORDER BY type, rent DESC.

Five aggregate functions are COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, and MAX.

COUNT returns the number of values in a specified column.

SUM returns the sum of values in a specified column.

AVG returns the average of values in a specified column.

MIN returns the smallest value in a specified column.

MAX returns the largest value in a specified column.

COUNT(*) counts all rows of a table, regardless of whether nulls or duplicate values occur.

DISTINCT can be used before a column name to eliminate duplicates.

DISTINCT has no effect with MIN/MAX, but may have an effect with SUM/AVG.

Aggregate functions can be used only in the SELECT list and in the HAVING clause.

If the SELECT list includes an aggregate function and there is no GROUP BY clause, the SELECT list cannot reference a column outside an aggregate function.

The GROUP BY clause is used to get sub-totals in a SELECT statement.

SELECT and GROUP BY are closely integrated: each item in the SELECT list must be single-valued per group.

The SELECT clause may only contain column names, aggregate functions, constants, or expressions involving combinations of these.

All column names in the SELECT list must appear in the GROUP BY clause unless the name is used only in an aggregate function.

If WHERE is used with GROUP BY, WHERE is applied first, then groups are formed from the remaining rows satisfying the predicate.

The HAVING clause is designed for use with GROUP BY to restrict groups that appear in the final result table.

HAVING is similar to WHERE, but WHERE filters individual rows whereas HAVING filters groups.

Column names in the HAVING clause must also appear in the GROUP BY list or be contained within an aggregate function.

A subselect is a SELECT embedded within another SQL statement.

A subquery can be used in the WHERE and HAVING clauses of an outer SELECT.

Subselects may also appear in INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE statements.

A subquery with equality uses an inner SELECT to find a value that the outer SELECT then uses in its WHERE clause.

A subquery with an aggregate function can be used to compare values against an average or other aggregate.

You cannot write WHERE salary > AVG(salary); instead, use a subquery to find the average salary first.

The ORDER BY clause may not be used in a subquery, although it may be used in the outermost SELECT.

A subquery SELECT list must consist of a single column name or expression, except for subqueries that use EXISTS.

By default, column names refer to the table name in the FROM clause of the subquery.

When a subquery is an operand in a comparison, the subquery must appear on the right-hand side.

A subquery may not be used as an operand in an expression.

The IN operator can be used with a subquery to test set membership.

ANY and ALL may be used with subqueries that produce a single column of numbers.

With ALL, the condition is only true if it is satisfied by all values produced by the subquery.

With ANY, the condition is true if it is satisfied by any values produced by the subquery.

If a subquery is empty, ALL returns true and ANY returns false.

SOME may be used in place of ANY.

Multi-table queries are needed when result columns come from more than one table.

To perform a join, include more than one table in the FROM clause.

Use a comma as a separator and typically include a WHERE clause to specify the join column(s).

An alias for a table in the FROM clause is separated from the table name with a space.

An alias can be used to qualify column names when there is ambiguity.

A simple join includes only those rows from both tables that have identical values in the join columns.

SQL provides alternative join syntaxes such as JOIN ... ON, JOIN ... USING, and NATURAL JOIN.

NATURAL JOIN produces a table with only one copy of the common column.

A three-table join uses multiple join conditions in the WHERE clause.

The join operation combines data from two tables by forming pairs of related rows where the matching columns have the same value.

If one row of a joined table is unmatched, the row is omitted from the result table in an inner join.

Outer joins include rows with unmatched columns: Left, Right, and Full Outer joins.

A Left Outer Join includes those rows of the first (left) table unmatched with rows from the second (right) table.

In a Left Outer Join, columns from the second table are filled with NULLs for unmatched rows.

A Right Outer Join includes those rows of the second (right) table unmatched with rows from the first (left) table.

In a Right Outer Join, columns from the first table are filled with NULLs for unmatched rows.

A Full Outer Join includes rows that are unmatched in both tables.

In a Full Outer Join, unmatched columns from either table are filled with NULLs.

EXISTS and NOT EXISTS are for use only with subqueries.

EXISTS and NOT EXISTS produce a simple true/false result.

EXISTS is true if and only if there exists at least one row in the result table returned by the subquery.

NOT EXISTS is the opposite of EXISTS.

As EXISTS and NOT EXISTS check only for existence or non-existence of rows, the subquery can contain any number of columns.

It is common for subqueries following EXISTS or NOT EXISTS to be of the form (SELECT * ...).

UNION returns a table containing all rows that are in either the first table or the second table or both.

INTERSECT returns a table containing all rows that are common to both tables.

EXCEPT (or DIFFERENCE) returns a table containing all rows that are in the first table but not in the second table.

For set operations, the two tables must be union-compatible: they must have the same number of columns with corresponding columns having the same data types and lengths.

It is the user's responsibility to ensure that data values in corresponding columns come from the same domain.

The ALL keyword in set operations allows the result to include duplicate rows.

CORRESPONDING BY specifies that the set operation is performed on the named column(s).

If CORRESPONDING is specified but not BY, the set operation is performed on the columns common to both tables.

INTERSECT can be rewritten using a join or an EXISTS subquery.

EXCEPT can be rewritten using NOT IN or NOT EXISTS.

A base relation is a named relation corresponding to an entity in the conceptual schema, whose tuples are physically stored in the database.

A view is the dynamic result of one or more relational operations operating on base relations to produce another relation.

A view is a virtual relation that does not necessarily actually exist in the database but is produced upon request.

The contents of a view are defined as a query on one or more base relations.

Views are dynamic, meaning changes made to base relations are immediately reflected in the view.

The CREATE VIEW statement syntax is: CREATE VIEW ViewName [ (newColumnName [, ...]) ] AS subselect [WITH [CASCADED | LOCAL] CHECK OPTION].

A view can assign a name to each column, but if a list of column names is specified, it must have the same number of items as the number of columns produced by the subselect.

If column names are omitted, each column takes the name of the corresponding column in the subselect.

The subselect in a CREATE VIEW statement is known as the defining query.

A horizontal view restricts the rows visible to a user, such as showing only staff at branch B003.

A vertical view restricts the columns visible to a user, such as excluding salaries.

A grouped and joined view can include aggregate functions and joins from multiple tables.

View resolution translates view column names into their corresponding column names in the defining query.

View resolution replaces view names in FROM with the corresponding FROM lists of the defining query.

View resolution combines the WHERE from the user query with the WHERE of the defining query using AND.

View resolution copies GROUP BY and HAVING clauses from the defining query.

View resolution copies ORDER BY from the query with view column names translated into defining query column names.

If a column in a view is based on an aggregate function, that column may appear only in SELECT and ORDER BY clauses of queries that access the view.

A column based on an aggregate function may not be used in WHERE or as an argument to an aggregate function in any query based on the view.

A grouped view may never be joined with a base table or another view.

The DROP VIEW statement syntax is: DROP VIEW ViewName [RESTRICT | CASCADE].

With CASCADE, all related dependent objects are deleted when a view is dropped.

With RESTRICT (the default), if any other objects depend on the view being dropped, the command is rejected.

Advantages of views include data independence, currency, improved security, reduced complexity, convenience, customization, and data integrity.

Disadvantages of views include update restriction, structure restriction, and performance.

View materialization stores a view as a temporary table when the view is first queried.

Materialized views can be faster than recomputing the view each time, but maintaining currency while base tables are updated is difficult.

A stored procedure contains a sequence of SQL commands stored in the database catalog so that it can be invoked later by a program.

The SQL Database Server stores stored procedures as named objects.

Stored procedures can be invoked using triggers, other procedures, and applications such as Java, Python, and PHP.

The CREATE PROCEDURE statement syntax is: CREATE PROCEDURE procedure_name (@parameter1 data_type, @parameter2 data_type, ...) AS BEGIN --sql_statements and logic END.

An input parameter is used as an input value only, declared as @parameter_name data_type.

An output parameter is used as an output value only, declared as @parameter_name data_type OUTPUT.

A stored procedure is executed using the EXEC or EXECUTE command.

Stored procedures are very effective for manipulating large datasets within the database.

Stored procedures do not incur communications overhead.

Stored procedures are often used to provide a secure interface to data.

Banks lock down data and only expose operations through stored procedures.

Stored procedures can encapsulate business logic.

Stored procedures can forbid invalid states by requiring all operations to go through them.

Drawbacks of stored procedures include increased load on the database system and difficulty migrating to a different DBMS.

Information is a valuable asset that must be kept safe from competitors.

The confidentiality of certain information, such as salaries, must be protected within a company.

Unauthorized changes or falsification of data must be prohibited.

Security requirements include ensuring only legitimate users have access to the database through user identification and authentication.

Security requirements include defining which user can perform which operations on which database objects through authorization.

Security requirements include logging the actions of users through auditing.

Security requirements include ensuring privacy and integrity of data in a networked client-server environment.

Security requirements include managing groups of users with the same rights.

Security requirements include ensuring nobody has direct access to the data, circumventing the database access control.

Security requirements include separating responsibilities of different administrators.

An authorization identifier is a normal SQL identifier used to establish the identity of a user, usually with an associated password.

Each object created in SQL has an owner, as defined in the AUTHORIZATION clause of the schema to which the object belongs.

A login grants access to the server, while a user grants a login access to the database.

An SQL user with login is for people who manage the SQL Server and for people who need to access many or all databases on the instance.

An SQL user with password is for people who only need access to one or a few databases and cannot authenticate with Windows authentication.

In SQL, access rights on database objects can be given to other users by means of the GRANT command.

INSERT, UPDATE, and REFERENCES privileges can be restricted to named columns.

The owner of a table must grant other users the necessary privileges using the GRANT statement.

To create a view, a user must have SELECT privilege on all tables that make up the view and REFERENCES privilege on the named columns.

The GRANT statement syntax is: GRANT {PrivilegeList | ALL PRIVILEGES} ON ObjectName TO {AuthorizationIdList | PUBLIC} [WITH GRANT OPTION].

ALL PRIVILEGES grants all privileges to a user.

PUBLIC allows access to be granted to all present and future authorized users.

WITH GRANT OPTION allows privileges to be passed on to other users.

Example: GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON Staff TO Manager WITH GRANT OPTION gives Manager full privileges to the Staff table.

Example: GRANT SELECT, UPDATE (salary) ON Staff TO Personnel, Director gives SELECT and UPDATE on the salary column.

Example: GRANT SELECT ON Branch TO PUBLIC gives all users SELECT on the Branch table.

REVOKE takes away privileges granted with GRANT.

The REVOKE statement syntax is: REVOKE [GRANT OPTION FOR] {PrivilegeList | ALL PRIVILEGES} ON ObjectName FROM {AuthorizationIdList | PUBLIC} [RESTRICT | CASCADE].

ALL PRIVILEGES in REVOKE refers to all privileges granted to a user by the user revoking privileges.

GRANT OPTION FOR allows privileges passed on via WITH GRANT OPTION to be revoked separately from the privileges themselves.

REVOKE fails if it results in an abandoned object, such as a view, unless CASCADE is specified.

Privileges granted to a user by other users are not affected by REVOKE.

In SQL Server, CASCADE is always required when revoking a right that was granted WITH GRANT OPTION.

If A granted a privilege WITH GRANT OPTION to B, and B granted it to C, and then A revokes the right from B, it is recursively revoked from C.

If C obtained the right through another path, such as directly from A, C keeps it.

Example: REVOKE SELECT ON Branch FROM PUBLIC revokes SELECT privilege on the Branch table from all users.

Example: REVOKE ALL PRIVILEGES ON Staff FROM Director revokes all privileges given to Director on the Staff table.

Database design involves understanding the real-world domain being modeled and specifying it using a database design model.

Design models are especially convenient for schema design but are not necessarily implemented by DBMS.

Conceptual design asks what entities and relationships are in the enterprise and what information should be stored.

An ER diagram can be represented pictorially and mapped into a relational schema.

An entity is a real-world object distinguishable from other objects, such as an employee, item, customer, student, or course.

An entity is described using a set of attributes.

An entity set is a collection of similar entities, such as all employees.

All entities in an entity set have the same set of attributes.

Each entity set has a key, and each attribute has a domain.

Attributes are properties used to describe an entity, such as name, SSN, address, sex, and birthdate.

A specific entity will have a value for each of its attributes.

Each attribute has a value set or data type associated with it, such as integer, text, or date.

A simple attribute has a single atomic value for the attribute, such as SSN or Sex.

A composite attribute may be composed of several components, such as Address or Name.

Composition may form a hierarchy where some components are themselves composite.

A multi-valued attribute means an entity may have multiple values for that attribute, such as Color of a car or PreviousDegrees of a student.

A derived attribute has a value that can be computed from other attributes, such as age computed from date of birth.

A key attribute is an attribute for which each entity must have a unique value, such as SSN of an employee.

A key attribute may be composite, such as VehicleTagNumber with components Number and State.

An entity type may have more than one key, such as VIN and VehicleTagNumber for a car.

A relationship is an association between two or more entities, such as a student enrolled on a course.

A relationship set is a collection of similar relationships.

The degree of a relationship is the number of participating entity types.

A binary relationship involves two entities, such as enroll involving student and course.

Ternary and n-ary relationships also exist.

In ER notation, rectangles represent entity sets and diamonds represent relationship sets.

Lines link attributes to entity sets and entity sets to relationship sets.

Ellipses represent attributes, double ellipses represent multivalued attributes, and dashed ellipses denote derived attributes.

Underline indicates primary key attributes.

An attribute can also be a property of a relationship set, such as the date a student enrolled on a course.

Mapping cardinalities express the number of entities to which another entity can be associated via a relationship set.

The four types of mapping cardinality for binary relationships are one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, and many-to-many.

Cardinality constraints are expressed by drawing a directed line for "one" and an undirected line for "many" between the relationship set and the entity set.

In a one-to-one relationship, each entity in set A is associated with at most one entity in set B and vice versa.

In a one-to-many relationship, each entity in set A is associated with many entities in set B, but each entity in set B is associated with at most one entity in set A.

In a many-to-one relationship, each entity in set A is associated with at most one entity in set B, but each entity in set B is associated with many entities in set A.

In a many-to-many relationship, each entity in set A is associated with many entities in set B and vice versa.

Roles specify how entities interact via a relationship set when the entity sets of a relationship are not distinct.

Roles are indicated in ER diagrams by labeling the lines that connect diamonds to rectangles.

Role labels are optional and are used to clarify the semantics of the relationship.

Total participation, indicated by a double line, means every entity in the entity set participates in at least one relationship in the relationship set.

Partial participation means some entities may not participate in the relationship set.

A weak entity set is an entity set that does not have a primary key.

The existence of a weak entity set depends on the existence of an identifying entity set.

A weak entity set must relate to the identifying entity set via a total, one-to-many relationship set from the identifying to the weak entity set.

The identifying relationship is depicted using a double diamond.

The discriminator or partial key of a weak entity set is the set of attributes that distinguishes among all entities of the weak entity set.

The primary key of a weak entity set is formed by the primary key of the strong entity set plus the weak entity set's discriminator.

A weak entity set is depicted by double rectangles.

The discriminator of a weak entity set is underlined with a dashed line.

Specialization is a top-down design process that designates subgroupings within an entity set.

Subgroupings become lower-level entity sets that have attributes or participate in relationships that do not apply to the higher-level entity set.

Specialization is depicted by a triangle component labeled ISA.

Attribute inheritance means a lower-level entity set inherits all attributes and relationship participation of the higher-level entity set to which it is linked.

Generalization is a bottom-up design process that combines entity sets sharing the same features into a higher-level entity set.

Specialization and generalization are simple inversions of each other and are represented in an ER diagram in the same way.

The terms specialization and generalization are used interchangeably.

Multiple specializations of an entity set can be based on different features.

The ISA relationship is also referred to as a superclass-subclass relationship.

A design constraint on specialization/generalization is whether entities can be condition-defined or user-defined members of a lower-level entity set.

A disjoint constraint means an entity can belong to only one lower-level entity set.

An overlapping constraint means an entity can belong to more than one lower-level entity set.

A completeness constraint specifies whether an entity in the higher-level entity set must belong to at least one of the lower-level entity sets.

Total completeness means an entity must belong to one of the lower-level entity sets.

Partial completeness means an entity need not belong to one of the lower-level entity sets.

Reducing an ER diagram into tables involves converting ER diagram components into a relational schema with required data types and constraints.

Step 1 of ER-to-table conversion is to analyze the entities by identifying each distinct entity and examining its attributes.

Step 2 is to create a separate table for each entity, with each attribute as a column and the primary key assigned as a column.

Step 3 is to map relationships by identifying one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many relationships.

Step 4 is to verify and refine the created tables and relationships for accuracy and efficiency.

A strong entity set is converted into a table with attributes as fields, and the key attribute becomes the primary key.

An entity set reduces to a table with the same attributes.

To convert a weak entity, create a separate table with the same name and include all attributes.

A weak entity includes the primary key of a strong entity as a foreign key.

The weak entity's primary key is a combination of the foreign key and the discriminator attribute.

Simple attributes become normal fields in a table.

Composite attributes store only the lower-level attributes as fields, with no column for the composite attribute itself.

Derived attributes are NOT stored as fields.

Multi-valued attributes are included in a separate table, with the primary key being a combination of the entity's primary key and the multi-valued attribute.

Cardinality mapping determines the keys for relationship sets.

A many-to-many relationship requires a relationship table, with the primary key being a combination of the primary keys of the associating entity sets.

Any attribute attached to a many-to-many relationship set is included as a field in the relationship table.

In a one-to-many relationship, the primary key of the entity set on the "one" side is included as a foreign key in the table representing the entity set on the "many" side.

Any attribute attached to a one-to-many relationship set is included as a field in the same table as the foreign key.

In a one-to-one relationship, the primary key of any of the associating entity sets is included as a foreign key in the table representing the other entity set.

Any attribute attached to a one-to-one relationship set is included as a field in the same table as the foreign key.

For a role, the primary key of the table representing the entity set is included as a foreign key in the same table.

Example: For a many-to-many relationship between student and course, a third table enroll (sid, cid) is required.

Example: If the enroll relationship has a year attribute, the enroll table becomes enroll (sid, cid, year).

Example: In a one-to-one relationship between student and mailAccount, an additional column is added in either table as the foreign key, such as student (sid, name, username) and mailAccount (username, pwd).

Partial specialization requires tables for both the high-level entity and the lower-level entities.

Total specialization requires tables only for the lower-level entity sets.

For an overlapping class hierarchy, create a table for each superclass entity set with all attributes of subclass entities included.

For a disjoint class hierarchy, create a table for each subclass entity set with columns for subclass attributes plus all superclass attributes including the primary key.

Example: In an overlapping hierarchy, the person table would include name, street, city, salary, and credit-rating.

Example: In a disjoint hierarchy, the employee table would include name, street, city, and salary, and the customer table would include name, street, city, and credit-rating.

Authentication answers the question "who are you?"

Authorization answers the question "what are you allowed to do?"

Encryption is the process of protecting the data.

Auditing answers the question "what did you do?"

Redaction disguises sensitive data on returned results.

Masking creates a similar but inauthentic version of the data for training or testing.

A firewall uses threat patterns, approved whitelisted commands, blacklist commands, monitors for data leakage, and evaluates IP address, time, and location.

Integrity means data should be accurate and tolerant to physical problems such as hardware failure and power failures.

Database security involves protecting the database from unauthorized access, modification, or destruction.

Database designers are responsible for protecting the privacy of individuals about whom data is kept.

Privacy is the right of individuals to have some control over information about themselves.

The CIA model stands for Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability.

Confidentiality means only authorized users have access to information.

Integrity means only authorized users are allowed to modify data.

Availability means information is accessible by authorized users when needed.

Regulatory and compliance standards that enforce encryption include HIPAA, PCI-DSS, and GDPR.

Data stored in a database can be in encrypted form.

Encryption of data means encoding data by a special algorithm that renders the data unreadable without the decryption key.

Encryption requires a cipher system consisting of an encryption algorithm, an encryption key, a decryption algorithm, and a decryption key.

The encryption algorithm takes plaintext as input and transforms it into ciphertext.

The encryption key is part of the input for the encryption algorithm and is chosen from a very large set of possible keys.

The decryption algorithm uses the decryption key on ciphertext as input and creates the original plaintext as output.

Digital signatures are used to detect unauthorized modifications to data and to authenticate the identity of the signatory.

Asymmetric encryption is used to encrypt a symmetric key for storage in a database.

Symmetric key encryption is a form of encryption where the decryption key is the same as the encryption key.

In symmetric key encryption, the decryption algorithm is the inverse of the encryption algorithm.

Symmetric key encryption ensures the confidentiality of data.

The most common symmetric key schemes are Data Encryption Scheme (DES) and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).

DES was created by IBM in 1977, and its algorithm is public while the key is private.

DES uses a 56-bit key and operates on 64-bit blocks of plaintext.

In DES, each block's characters are substituted and rearranged according to the value of the key.

AES is the gold standard of symmetric encryption algorithms.

AES offers strong security with key lengths of 128, 192, or 256 bits.

Longer key lengths are more resistant to cracking.

AES-256 uses a 256-bit key.

Public-key encryption assures the confidentiality, authenticity, and non-repudiation of electronic communications and data storage.

Public-key encryption uses two different keys: a private key and a public key.

The private key remains confidential to its respective owner.

The public key can be shared freely with anyone.

A secure asymmetric cryptographic system makes it so that sharing the public key cannot compromise the integrity of the system.

RSA is a well-known public-key encryption method.

Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) is a well-known public-key encryption method.

In RSA, each user has a pair of large prime numbers (p, q) as their private key, and the product p*q becomes the user's public key.

The public key is shared freely and used as input to an encryption algorithm to produce ciphertext for that user.

The user must produce the prime factors of the public key to decode the encrypted message.

An asymmetric encryption system allows for signing and verifying.

Sign takes in a message and the private key and returns a signature.

Verify takes in a message and the public key and returns Accept or Reject.

Digital signatures are used in electronic mail, electronic funds transfer, electronic data interchange, software distribution, and data storage.

In WhatsApp, public keys of the client are registered with the application server, and the private key remains secret in the user's device.

To initiate a WhatsApp session, the sender retrieves the recipient's public keys, encrypts the first message, and sends it to the recipient.

The first WhatsApp message contains the parameters for establishing a symmetric session key.

The recipient uses their own private key to decrypt the message.

Once a session is established, clients exchange messages protected with a Message Key using AES and hash functions.

The encrypted session needs to be re-created only when the device is changed or the application software is re-installed.

Symmetric encryption is much faster than asymmetric cryptography.

Asymmetric encryption assures confidentiality, authenticity, and non-repudiation.

The disadvantage of symmetric encryption is the key distribution problem and the key management problem.

Symmetric encryption ensures only the confidentiality of transmitted or stored data.

Asymmetric encryption is slow and resource exhaustive when compared with symmetric encryption.

Two types of database encryption are Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) and Column-Level Encryption (CLE).

TDE encrypts the entire database, including the actual data and the log files at rest.

TDE provides a transparent layer of security over the database with small changes in the actual database schema.

TDE operates on the file level, encrypting the database files on the disk.

TDE encryption works automatically as data is read from or written to the database.

TDE uses a symmetric key for securing the database.

TDE is not available in SQL Server Express Edition.

CLE involves encrypting specific columns within a table rather than the whole table or database.

CLE allows organizations to selectively secure their data.

CLE is useful when dealing with databases that store a combination of both sensitive and insensitive data.

CLE operates on the file level, encrypting the database files on the disk.

CLE also uses asymmetric keys for data encryption.

A database master key is a symmetric key used to protect asymmetric keys in a database.

The database master key must be open before it can be used.

The database master key is explicitly created in a statement within the database context.

A symmetric key requires either a certificate or an asymmetric key to protect it in the database.

An asymmetric key can be created with CREATE ASYMMETRIC KEY.

A certificate can be created with CREATE CERTIFICATE.

A symmetric key can be created with CREATE SYMMETRIC KEY.

The symmetric encryption keys in a database can be listed with SELECT * FROM sys.symmetric_keys.

To encrypt data and insert it into the database, the symmetric key must be opened.

The EncryptByKey function takes the unique GUID that identifies the key.

The Key_GUID function retrieves the GUID rather than passing the value directly.

Closing the symmetric key removes the key from memory and frees those resources for other uses.

DecryptByKey returns varbinary data, since the encrypted data can be any data type.

The result of the DecryptByKey function must be converted into an appropriate text string.

Database security is the mechanism that protects the database against intentional or accidental threats.

Database security is applied against theft and fraud, loss of confidentiality, loss of privacy, loss of integrity, and loss of availability.

A threat is any situation or event, whether intentional or accidental, that may adversely affect a system and consequently the organization.

Threat actors include insiders such as employees, former employees, curiosity seekers, and customers.

Threat actors include outsiders such as nation states, criminals, and hacktivists.

Attackers exploit unpatched systems or misconfigured databases to bypass access controls.

Attackers escalate run-time privileges by exploiting vulnerable applications.

Attackers search for sensitive data in unprotected databases, applications, and systems.

Attackers steal credentials of privileged administrators through email-based phishing and social engineering.

Attackers access accounts through password guessing or exploiting careless credential management.

Attackers exploit application weaknesses with techniques like SQL injection.

Attackers exploit unprotected systems as a bridge to launch attacks against more sensitive systems.

Attackers create rogue user accounts as a base for reconnaissance and possible escalation of privilege.

Attackers target copies of live production data used in development and test systems.

Attackers access unencrypted database system files on the disk or in backup files.

Attackers encrypt data or steal encryption keys, rendering data inaccessible and demanding a ransom.

Assessment controls assess the security posture of a database.

Preventive controls block access to data by unauthorized users using encryption and database-level controls.

Detective controls monitor user and application data access to detect and block threats.

Exposure-limiting controls selectively redact or obfuscate sensitive data.

Data controls enforce fine-grained access at the row and column level within the database.

User controls enforce proper user authentication and authorization policies.

Assessment controls include security assessment, user assessment, privilege analysis, and sensitive data discovery.

Preventive controls include network encryption, data encryption, privileged user controls, SQL blocking, and automated database patching.

Detective controls include database activity auditing, audit record collection and reporting, and SQL monitoring.

Exposure-limiting controls include dynamic masking and static masking.

Data controls include fine-grained data access control and label-based access control.

User controls include password policies, strong authentication, and centralized user management.

Insecure configuration and configuration drift are addressed by security assessment.

Unpatched and out-of-date systems are addressed by automated database patching.

Lack of a consistently enforced security policy is addressed by fine-grained data access control.

Lack of visibility into sensitive data placement and quantity is addressed by sensitive data discovery.

Over-privileged database users and administrators are addressed by privileged user controls.

Weak authentication and shared accounts are addressed by password policies, strong authentication, and centralized user management.

SQL injection vulnerabilities and insecure application design are addressed by SQL monitoring and SQL blocking.

Trusting vulnerable networks is addressed by network encryption.

Insufficient or inefficient monitoring and auditing are addressed by database activity auditing and audit record collection and reporting.

Sensitive data proliferation to non-production databases is addressed by static data masking.

Unprotected servers and database backups are addressed by data encryption.

Insecure encryption keys and secrets are addressed by key and secrets management.

Threats to databases include loss of integrity, loss of availability, and loss of confidentiality.

Four kinds of countermeasures can protect databases: access control, inference control, flow control, and encryption.

Access control is the security mechanism that restricts access to the database as a whole.

Access control is handled by creating user accounts and passwords to control the login process.

Access control is also handled by controlling what operations users can perform through authorization.

The database administrator (DBA) is the central authority for managing a database system.

The DBA's responsibilities include granting privileges to users who need to use the system.

The DBA's responsibilities include classifying users and data in accordance with the policy of the organization.

The DBA is responsible for the overall security of the database system.

Access control in a database system is based on granting and revoking privileges.

The account level specifies the particular privileges that each account holds independently of the relations in the database.

The relation level (or table level) controls the privilege to access each individual relation or view in the database.

Account level privileges include CREATE SCHEMA, CREATE TABLE, CREATE VIEW, ALTER, DROP, MODIFY, and SELECT.

The access matrix model has rows representing subjects such as users, accounts, and programs.

The access matrix model has columns representing objects such as relations, records, columns, views, and operations.

Each position M(i,j) in the access matrix represents the types of privileges that subject i holds on object j.

Each relation R in a database is assigned an owner account, typically the account used when the relation was created.

The owner of a relation is given all privileges on that relation.

The owner account holder can pass privileges on any owned relation to other users by granting privileges.

SELECT privilege on R gives the account retrieval privilege to retrieve tuples from R.

MODIFY privileges on R give the account the capability to modify tuples of R using UPDATE, DELETE, and INSERT.

INSERT and UPDATE privileges can specify that only certain attributes can be updated by the account.

REFERENCES privilege on R gives the account the capability to reference relation R when specifying integrity constraints.

REFERENCES privilege can be restricted to specific attributes of R.

To create a view, the account must have SELECT privilege on all relations involved in the view definition.

Views are an important authorization mechanism.

A view can limit a user to retrieving only certain fields of a relation.

A view can limit a user to retrieving only certain tuples of a relation.

A REVOKE command cancels privileges.

The GRANT OPTION allows a user to grant a privilege on a relation to other accounts.

If the owner revokes a privilege granted with GRANT OPTION, all privileges propagated based on that privilege are automatically revoked.

Example: CREATE SCHEMA EXAMPLE AUTHORIZATION A1 allows only A1 to create base relations.

Example: GRANT INSERT, DELETE ON EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT TO A2 gives A2 insert and delete privileges without the ability to propagate them.

Example: GRANT SELECT ON EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT TO A3 WITH GRANT OPTION allows A3 to propagate the SELECT privilege.

Example: REVOKE SELECT ON EMPLOYEE FROM A3 automatically revokes the SELECT privilege from A4 if A3 had granted it to A4.

Example: CREATE VIEW A3EMPLOYEE AS SELECT NAME, BDATE, ADDRESS FROM EMPLOYEE WHERE DNO = 5 creates a limited view.

Example: GRANT SELECT ON A3EMPLOYEE TO A3 WITH GRANT OPTION grants SELECT on the view with the ability to propagate.

Example: GRANT UPDATE ON EMPLOYEE (SALARY) TO A4 allows A4 to update only the SALARY attribute.

UPDATE and INSERT privileges can specify particular attributes that may be updated or inserted in a relation.

SELECT and DELETE privileges are not attribute specific.

Role-based access control (RBAC) is a proven technology for managing and enforcing security in large-scale enterprisewide systems.

In RBAC, permissions are associated with roles, and users are assigned to appropriate roles.

Roles can be created using the CREATE ROLE command.

The GRANT and REVOKE commands can be used to assign and revoke privileges from roles.

Roles can be hierarchically grouped under other roles.

Granting roles to other roles allows privileges to be grouped into a task role.

Multiple task roles can be grouped for an organizational role.

The DBA creates roles.

Roles store groups of privileges.

Roles are assigned to groups of users or to other roles.

Roles can be created with or without a password.

Assigning a password to a role protects authorization in the database.

Example: CREATE ROLE manager creates a role named manager.

Example: CREATE ROLE supervisor AUTHORIZATION A1 creates a role with ownership to A1.

Example: ALTER ROLE manager ADD MEMBER A1 assigns account A1 to the role manager.

Example: GRANT create table, create view TO manager grants privileges to a role.

Example: GRANT SELECT on EMPLOYEE TO manager grants operation to a role.

A role can be granted to other roles.

A role cannot be granted to itself and cannot be circular.

If a role is not password authenticated or a secure application role, it can be granted indirectly to the user.

To drop a role, the user should have DROP ANY ROLE system privilege or ADMIN option.

Dropping a role removes all indirectly granted roles from the dropped role.

Only privileges are removed when a role is dropped, but the indirect role is available in the database.

For dropping a role, all members should be removed.

Example: ALTER ROLE manager DROP MEMBER A1 removes user A1 from the manager role.

Example: DROP ROLE manager drops the manager role.

Temporal constraints on roles include time and duration of role activations and timed triggering of a role by another role.

Using an RBAC model is a highly desirable goal for addressing key security requirements of Web-based applications.

Snowflake is a versatile data cloud platform that enables analytical capabilities.

In Snowflake, privileges on objects such as compute warehouse and analytics database include MODIFY, MONITOR, OPERATE, USAGE, and CREATE SCHEMA.

In Snowflake, roles such as ANALYST ROLE and DATA ENGINEERING ROLE are assigned to users.

In Snowflake, database privileges include USAGE, MODIFY, and CREATE SCHEMA.

In Snowflake, virtual warehouse privileges include USAGE, MONITOR, and OPERATE.

In Snowflake, table privileges include SELECT, INSERT, and TRUNCATE.

Snowflake role types include Account Role, Database Role, and Instance Role.

In Snowflake role hierarchy, SYSADMIN is at the top, with roles such as Analyst Role and Data Eng Role below.

Database Manager Role can be granted to Data Eng Role.

Analyst Role can be granted to a user such as Rufus.

Data Eng Role can be granted to a user such as Kim.

The 3 A's of Information Security are Authentication, Access Control, and Auditing.

Authentication figures out who is accessing the system.

Access control ensures only authorized accesses are allowed.

Auditing records what is happening to identify attacks later and recover.

Authentication is the act of establishing or confirming something or someone as authentic.

User authentication validates users who attempt to access a computer system or resources to ensure they are authorized.

The three types of user authentication are something you know, something you have, and something you are.

Something you know includes user account names and passwords.

Something you have includes smart cards or other security tokens.

Something you are includes biometrics.

Variants of passwords include passphrases, which are sequences of words or other text, and passcodes, such as personal identification numbers (PINs).

Scenarios requiring user authentication include logging into a local computer, logging in remotely, logging into a network, and accessing web sites.

Vulnerabilities can exist at the client side, server side, or communications channel.

Threats to passwords include eavesdropping on an insecure channel between client and server.

Threats to passwords include login spoofing, shoulder surfing, and keyloggers.

Threats to passwords include offline dictionary attacks.

Threats to passwords include social engineering, such as pretexting.

Threats to passwords include online guessing of weak passwords.

Examples of weak passwords include default passwords such as password, default, admin, and guest.

Examples of weak passwords include dictionary words, words with numbers appended, words with simple obfuscation, and doubled words.

Examples of weak passwords include common keyboard sequences like qwerty and 12345.

Examples of weak passwords include numeric sequences based on well-known numbers like 911 and 314159.

Examples of weak passwords include identifiers such as jsmith123 or a username.

Examples of weak passwords include anything personally related to an individual, such as license plate number, Social Security number, or birthday.

Mechanisms to avoid weak passwords include allowing long passphrases and forbidding short passwords.

Mechanisms to avoid weak passwords include randomly generating passwords where appropriate.

Mechanisms to avoid weak passwords include giving user suggestions and guidelines in choosing passwords.

Mechanisms to avoid weak passwords include using both letters, numbers, and special characters.

Mechanisms to avoid weak passwords include checking the quality of user-selected passwords.

Password management policy can be controlled by DBAs and security officers through user profiles.

The DBA can establish standards for password complexity, such as minimum password length.

Passwords should be words that cannot be found in the dictionary and should not consist of people's names or birthdates.

Passwords can be timed out, expiring after a certain amount of time, requiring users to change the value periodically.

Reuse of passwords can be prohibited for a certain amount of time.

When a user exceeds a designated number of failed login attempts, the server can automatically lock that user's account.

Strong authentication uses a central facility to authenticate all members of the network.

Two-factor authentication combines something a user knows, such as a PIN, with something the user has, such as a token card.

Strong authentication provides more choices of authentication mechanism, such as smart cards, Kerberos, or the operating system.

Many network authentication services, such as Kerberos and DCE, support single sign-on, meaning users have fewer passwords to remember.

SQL injection is one of the most popular attack patterns on the OWASP top ten threats to application security.

Other common threats include unauthorized privilege escalation, privilege abuse, denial of service, and weak authentication.

SQL injection attacks target applications and the underlying database by injecting malicious SQL into input fields or parameters of data-driven applications.

The attack forces the application to respond to the attacker-injected SQL.

Attackers may try to use SQL injection to add, modify, and delete records in the database.

In a typical SQL injection, entering John' OR 1=1 -- in the username field causes all phonebook entries to be displayed.

The query SELECT * FROM phonebook WHERE username = 'John' OR 1=1 -- AND password = 'not needed' bypasses authentication.

In SQL injection, most systems separate code from data.

SQL queries can be constructed by arbitrary sequences of programming constructs that involve string operations such as concatenation and substring.

Such constructs also involve untrusted user inputs.

Inputs should be mere "data," but in case of SQL, results in "code."

Queries intended by the programmer can be changed by untrusted user input.

Risks associated with SQL injection include database fingerprinting, denial of service, and bypassing authentication.

Risks associated with SQL injection include identifying injectable parameters, executing remote commands, and performing privilege escalation.

A defense against SQL injection is to restrict database code by using prepared statements with parameterized queries.

Prepared statements separate query structure from data, and statements are not parsed for every user input.

If an attacker enters John' or '1'='1 in a parameterized query, the query looks for a username that literally matches the entire string.

Another defense is to filter database inputs by detecting and filtering out malicious code from user inputs.

Another defense is to restrict database access by preventing unauthorized data access, exfiltration, or deletion through access control restrictions.

External access should be limited with firewalls.

User access should be limited to minimal error messages, database functions, and database tables.

Potential gains from a breach should be limited through encryption and minimal use of shared accounts.

Another defense is to maintain applications and databases by keeping them fully patched and updated and upgrading when possible.

Another defense is to monitor application and database inputs and communications to detect and block malicious SQLi attempts.

Backup and recovery are the strategies and procedures involved in protecting a database against data loss and reconstructing it after any kind of data loss.

Types of failures that can occur include user errors, media failures, and application errors.

User errors include an error in application logic or a manual mistake that changes or deletes data incorrectly.

Media failures include a physical problem with a disk that causes a failure of a read from or write to a disk file.

Application errors include a software malfunction that can corrupt data blocks.

Backup and recovery is important for data protection, business continuity, compliance, and integrity.

Physical backups are copies of the physical files used in storing and recovering a database, such as datafiles, control files, and archived redo logs.

Logical backups contain logical data extracted from a database, such as views, procedures, functions, and tables.

Logical backups provide only structural information and are a useful supplement to physical backups.

A full backup is a full copy of the database including the data and transaction records.

A full backup requires more time and storage space.

An incremental backup stores only the changes since the last full or incremental backup.

An incremental backup is faster and uses less storage.

A differential backup backs up changes made since the last full backup.

A differential backup stores both the data and transaction records and uses less storage.

A transaction log backup captures all transactions since the last log backup.

A transaction log backup is essential for point-in-time recovery.

The SQL for a full backup is: BACKUP DATABASE [database_name] TO DISK = 'C:\Backup\backup_file.bak' WITH INIT, NAME = 'FULLDB backup'.

The INIT option overwrites any existing backup file with the same name.

The COMPRESSION option enables backup compression, and NO_COMPRESSION explicitly disables it.

The ENCRYPTION option specifies an encryption algorithm to secure backup files stored offsite.

The SQL to restore a database is: RESTORE DATABASE [database_name] FROM DISK = 'C:\Backup\backup_file.bak' WITH RECOVERY.

WITH RECOVERY specifies that the database should be left in a recovered state, making it available for use.

The SQL for a differential backup is: BACKUP DATABASE [database_name] TO DISK = 'C:\Backup\backup_file.bak' WITH DIFFERENTIAL, NAME = 'FULLDB backup'.

The SQL for a transactional log backup is: BACKUP LOG [database_name] TO DISK='C:\Backup\database_Log.trn' WITH NAME = 'Log-Database backup'.

Backup frequency depends on how often data changes, how critical it is for the business, and how much data loss can be tolerated.

Backup frequency affects the recovery point objective (RPO), which is the maximum amount of data loss that can be accepted in case of a disaster.

Backup urgency determines how urgently the latest data is needed and how far the database could be rolled back before losing critical information.

Backup amount determines how much data needs to be backed up at a given time.

Backup type considers what type of data is being backed up, especially for regulatory compliance.

The location of backups determines the accessibility and durability of backups.

Backups may be stored on the same server as the database, a different server, a removable device, or a cloud service.

Backups on the same server as the database are fast and cheap but risk losing both the database and backups in case of hardware failure or cyberattack.

Backups on multiple locations, preferably offsite or on the cloud, increase the chances of recovery.

Testing of backups ensures that they are valid, consistent, and recoverable.

Backups should be tested regularly, preferably before and after every backup operation.

Backups should be tested on a different environment than the production database to avoid interfering with normal operations.

The 3-2-1 rule states to maintain three complete copies of data.

The 3-2-1 rule states to store backups on two different media types, such as disk and tape.

The 3-2-1 rule states to keep one copy offsite, such as cloud storage, to protect against physical disasters.

Automated backups schedule regular backups to ensure consistency and reduce human error.

Encryption of backups protects sensitive data from unauthorized access.

Recovery methods include Point-in-Time Recovery (PITR), Full Recovery, Partial Recovery, and Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP).

Point-in-Time Recovery restores the database to a specific moment in time using transaction logs.

Full Recovery restores the database to its state at the time of the last full backup.

Partial Recovery recovers only specific tables, schemas, or data subsets.

A Disaster Recovery Plan is a comprehensive plan outlining steps to recover the database in case of a major incident.

The DBMS records every transaction on stable storage, allowing for easy data recovery when a failure occurs.

For each operation performed on the database, a log file is created.

Log files contain information such as the start of a transaction, write operations with old and new values, and commit or abort of a transaction.

Transactions are logged and verified before being applied to the database, ensuring data integrity.

The undo operation reverses the changes made by an uncommitted transaction, restoring the database to its previous state.

The redo operation re-applies the changes made by a committed transaction to ensure consistency in the database.

Two techniques for log-based recovery are Immediate Modification and Deferred Modification.

In Immediate Modification, the database is modified immediately after every operation, even before the transaction is committed.

In Deferred Modification, changes to the database are logged and stored temporarily, and the database is updated when a transaction commits.

A checkpoint is the last time the transaction data was sent to disk.

All transactions started and committed before the last checkpoint do not need to be redone because the data has already been saved.

Recovery steps include analyzing the log, performing the redo phase, performing the undo phase, and completing recovery.

In the analyze phase, identify the most recent checkpoint and determine which transactions were active at the time of failure.

In the redo phase, start from the oldest log entry after the checkpoint and reapply changes for committed transactions.

In the undo phase, start from the most recent log entry and work backward, undoing changes for uncommitted transactions.

Once all redo and undo operations are complete, the database is in a consistent state.

Security best practices for backup and recovery include access control, encryption, audit and monitoring, offsite storage, immutable backups, and regular updates.

Access control restricts access to backups to authorized personnel only using role-based access control (RBAC).

Encryption of backups both in transit and at rest prevents unauthorized access.

Audit and monitoring logs and monitors backup and recovery activities to detect suspicious behavior.

Offsite storage stores backups in a secure, offsite location such as cloud storage with strong security measures.

Immutable backups use write-once, read-many (WORM) storage to prevent tampering with backups.

Regular updates keep backup software and tools updated to protect against vulnerabilities.

Common threats to database backups include ransomware, insider threats, physical theft, and corruption.

Ransomware attackers may encrypt or delete backups to prevent recovery.

Insider threats include malicious or negligent employees who may compromise backups.

Physical theft of stolen backup media can lead to data breaches.

Corruption occurs when backup files become corrupted due to hardware or software issues.

Disaster Recovery is the restoration of system operations after a disaster has occurred which causes damage or physical loss.

In database administration, disaster recovery involves recovering from a database failure or disaster situation.

Disasters can encompass natural phenomena such as earthquakes and floods.

Disasters can encompass man-made incidents such as cyberattacks and industrial accidents.

Hardware failures, such as physical components like hard drives or servers failing, can lead to data loss.

Software bugs can corrupt data or make the database inaccessible.

Human errors, such as accidental deletions or incorrect configurations, can disrupt database operations.

Malicious attacks, such as ransomware, can lock you out of your database or corrupt your data.

Disaster recovery is important for DBAs to ensure data availability, which is essential for business continuity.

A disaster recovery plan helps mitigate risks, minimize downtime, and ensure the resilience of database systems.

Disaster recovery enables quick data recovery and restoration of services to ensure uninterrupted operations.

Key components of a disaster recovery plan include the disaster recovery team, risk assessment and management, business impact analysis, recovery objectives, and data backup strategies.

A disaster recovery team should have a communication plan outlining how communication will be established with employees, customers, and stakeholders during a disaster.

Multiple communication channels, such as email, phone, and messaging apps, should be established to ensure team members can be reached.

Risk assessment involves identifying potential disasters that could affect the database, such as data loss, data breach, system downtime, and compliance violations.

Data loss can result from accidental deletion, hardware failure, or ransomware attacks.

A data breach involves unauthorized access to sensitive information, resulting in financial loss, reputational damage, and legal consequences.

System downtime from failures or performance issues can disrupt business operations and lead to financial losses and customer dissatisfaction.

Compliance violations from non-compliance with industry regulations can result in hefty fines and legal repercussions.

Risk assessment involves evaluating the likelihood of each event occurring.

Risk assessment involves evaluating the impact these disasters could have on business operations.

Risk assessment involves prioritizing recovery efforts and allocating resources effectively.

Business Impact Analysis (BIA) includes documentation of which systems, applications, data, and other resources are most critical for business continuity.

BIA includes the necessary steps to recover data.

A BIA for a cyberattack on a financial institution would evaluate the institution's cybersecurity posture and identify critical assets at risk.

A BIA for a cyberattack would assess how important impacted systems are to daily operations and possible financial losses from disruptions.

A BIA for a cyberattack would determine the timeframe for restoring secure operations and evaluate the effect on customer trust.

A BIA for a cyberattack would outline cybersecurity mitigation strategies and incident response plans that comply with ISO 22301 standards.

Recovery Time Objectives (RTO) and Recovery Point Objectives (RPO) determine acceptable downtime and data loss.

The RPO defines the maximum amount of data that can be lost without significantly impacting business operations.

The RTO sets the target time for restoring services after a disruption.

Data backup strategies include backups, clustering, and replication.

Backups involve scheduling backups at intervals, storing them securely, and restoring the database from the most recent backup after a disaster.

Clustering involves continuous replication of the database to a secondary site that acts as a real-time mirror of the primary database.

In case of a disaster, a failover mechanism to the secondary site minimizes downtime.

Replication involves setting up clusters and redundancy mechanisms to distribute the load and provide failover capabilities.

If one server fails, the others take over its workload.

Automatic failover detects failures and switches to a standby system without manual intervention.

Best practices for database disaster recovery include regularly testing and updating the plan.

Regularly testing the plan ensures the disaster recovery plan works when needed and helps identify weaknesses or gaps.

Best practices include ensuring off-site backups, such as cloud storage solutions.

Best practices include automating recovery processes to ensure consistency and reliability.

Monitoring tools should be used to detect issues early and trigger automated responses.

Best practices include establishing clear communication channels so everyone knows their specific tasks and who to report to during a disaster.

An example disaster recovery plan for a data center failure includes activating backup generators, initiating failover to redundant systems, and restoring data from offsite backups.

An example disaster recovery plan for a cyberattack includes isolating affected systems, engaging cybersecurity experts, restoring systems from clean backups, and incorporating additional security measures.

An example disaster recovery plan for human error includes stopping ongoing operations, attempting to recover deleted data from backups, using data recovery tools, and reviewing access controls.

A healthcare case study involved a provider partnering with a Managed IT services provider to implement automated backups, secure offsite storage, and regular testing.

A finance case study involved a firm implementing advanced security measures, regular backups, and a comprehensive disaster recovery plan.

A retail case study involved a business experiencing a ransomware attack and using backup and recovery solutions to restore systems and data quickly.

The five main security policies are System Security Policy, Data Security Policy, User Security Policy, Password Management Policy, and Auditing Policy.

System Security Policy includes database user management, user authentication, and operating system security.

Each database has one or more security administrators responsible for maintaining all aspects of the security policy.

Database user management is managed by security administrators who have privileges to manage database users.

The security administrator is the only user with the privileges required to create, alter, or drop database users.

Database users can be authenticated using the host operating system, network services, or the database.

Host operating system authentication is preferred because users can connect faster and more conveniently without specifying a username or password.

Host operating system authentication provides centralized control over user authorization in the operating system.

With host operating system authentication, user entries in the database and operating system audit trails correspond.

Database administrators must have the operating system privileges to create and delete files.

Typical database users should not have the operating system privileges to create or delete files related to the database.

If the operating system identifies database roles for users, security administrators must have privileges to modify the security domain of operating system accounts.

Data security includes the mechanisms that control the access and use of the database at the object level.

A data security policy covers the administration of data within an organization to safeguard all data the company utilizes, manages, and retains.

A data security policy determines which users have access to a specific schema object and the specific types of actions allowed for each user on the object.

Benefits of data security include keeping information safe, keeping reputation clean, giving a competitive edge, and saving on support and development costs.

Types of data security include encryption, data erasure, data masking, and data resiliency.

Encryption ensures messages can only be read by recipients with the appropriate decryption key.

Data erasure removes data that is no longer required to reduce data breach risk.

Data masking hides data by obscuring and replacing specific letters or numbers.

Data resiliency creates backups or copies of data in case of data loss or breach.

Data security solutions include access controls, cloud data security, data loss prevention, email security, and key management.

Access controls are rules around who can access data.

Cloud data security secures data while it is moving in the cloud.

Data loss prevention detects and prevents potential data breaches, such as exfiltration and unauthorized sharing.

Email security detects and prevents email-borne security threats.

Key management manages public and private keys used to encrypt and decrypt data.

Organizations are legally obliged to protect customer and user data from being lost or stolen.

Data security regulations include CCPA, GDPR, HIPAA, PCI DSS, SOX, and ISO 27001.

The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) aims to give consumers more control over how businesses collect their personal data.

CCPA gives consumers the right to know what information a business has and how it is shared or used.

CCPA gives consumers the right to delete their information.

CCPA gives consumers the right to opt out of their data being sold to third parties.

CCPA gives consumers the right to avoid discrimination for exercising their CCPA rights.

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a law that protects the personal data of European citizens.

GDPR ensures organizations process personal data securely and protect it from unauthorized processing, accidental loss, damage, and destruction.

GDPR carries a fine of 4% of a company's annual turnover or €20 million, whichever is highest.

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) is a federal law that protects patients' health data from being exposed without their consent or knowledge.

HIPAA contains a privacy rule that addresses the disclosure and use of patient information.

HIPAA has a security rule that protects all individually identifiable health information created, maintained, received, or transmitted electronically.

HIPAA compliance failure can result in fines of up to $50,000 per offense.

The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) ensures organizations securely process, store, and transmit credit card data.

PCI DSS is administered and managed by the PCI Security Standards Council (PCI SSC).

Failure to comply with PCI DSS can result in monthly fines of up to $100,000 and the suspension of card acceptance.

The Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act is a federal law that provides auditing and financial regulations for public organizations.

SOX protects employees, shareholders, and the public from accounting errors and fraudulent financial activity.

SOX regulates auditing, financial reporting, and other business activity at publicly traded organizations.

SOX applies to other enterprises, private organizations, and nonprofit firms.

ISO 27001 is an international standard for establishing, implementing, maintaining, and improving information security management systems.

ISO 27001 provides organizations with practical insight on how to develop comprehensive security policies and minimize risks.

Types of user security policy include general user security, end-user security, administrator security, application developer security, and application administrator security.

General user security includes password security policy and privilege management.

Password security policy includes changing passwords at regular intervals and using secure connections with encrypted passwords.

Privilege management includes using roles to manage the privileges available to users.

For large databases with many users, group users into categories and create user roles for these groups.

For large databases, grant the necessary privileges or application roles to each user role and assign the user roles to the users.

The security administrator must decide what privileges must be explicitly granted to individual users to account for exceptions.

Administrator security includes immediately changing the passwords for the administrative SYS and SYSTEM usernames to prevent unauthorized access.

Only database administrators should have SYSDBA privileges, such as startup, shutdown, and recover.

Using roles for administrator privilege management involves grouping related administrative privileges into administrative roles and granting them to appropriate administrator users.

Application developer security includes a special security policy for application developers using a database.

The application developer's environment includes test and production databases.

Free development allows developers to create new schema objects, including tables, indexes, procedures, and packages.

Controlled development does not allow developers to create new schema objects; all required objects are created by a database administrator.

Roles and privileges for application developers include creating roles to manage the privileges required by the typical application developer.

Space restrictions imposed on application developers include the tablespaces in which the developer can create tables or indexes.

Space restrictions also include the quota for each tablespace accessible to the developer.

An application administrator creates roles for an application and manages the privileges of each application role.

An application administrator creates and manages the objects used by a database application.

An application administrator maintains and updates the application code and DB procedures and packages as necessary.

Password management policy is controlled by DBAs.

Account locking means the server locks the account after a number of failed login attempts.

Password aging and expiration means the DBA specifies a maximum lifetime for passwords.

Password history means the DBA specifies a time interval during which users cannot reuse a password.

Password complexity verification can be implemented in T-SQL functions to check password lengths, ensure the password is not the same as the user ID, has at least one alpha, one numeric, and one punctuation mark, does not match common words, and differs from previous passwords by at least 3 letters.

An auditing policy is a policy for the auditing procedures of each database.

The DBA decides to have database auditing disabled unless required.

The DBA decides what level of details to audit.

The DBA decides on specific auditing after suspicious activity is determined.

Large amounts of person-specific data have been collected in recent years by governments and private entities.

Data and knowledge extracted by data mining techniques represent a key asset to society for analyzing trends and formulating public policies.

Laws and regulations require that some collected data must be made public, such as census data.

Public datasets include healthcare datasets, genetic datasets, demographic datasets, search logs, recommender systems, social networks, and blogs.

Privacy concerns include deciding what data to collect and why, how to use the data, and with whom to share data.

Privacy concerns include communicating privacy policies to end users and ensuring data are used in ways consistent with privacy policies.

Privacy concerns include protecting collected data (security) and anonymity in communications.

Preserving privacy involves anonymizing the data by removing personally identifying information (PII).

PII includes name, Social Security number, phone number, email, and address.

The GIC incidence in 2002 involved collected patient data for about 135,000 state employees that was given to researchers and sold to industry.

The medical record of the former state governor of Massachusetts was identified from the GIC dataset.

87% of US citizens can be uniquely linked using only three attributes.

Linking two sets of data on shared attributes may uniquely identify some individuals.

Sweeney (2002) managed to re-identify the medical record of the governor of Massachusetts by linking medical data with a voter list.

In August 2006, AOL released search keywords of 650,000 users over a 3-month period.

AOL replaced user IDs with random numbers and pulled the data from public access 3 days later.

The goal of the AOL project was to analyze data for research purposes and provide better services for users and advertisers.

The AOL data release led to re-identification: NYT contacted 14 citizens in Lilburn with last name Arnold and found out AOL User 4417749 was 62-year-old Thelma Arnold.

Netflix released anonymized movie rating data for its Netflix challenge, including date and value of movie ratings.

Knowing 6-8 approximate movie ratings and dates is able to uniquely identify a record with over 90% probability.

Correlating Netflix data with a set of 50 users from imdb.com yields two records.

Netflix canceled the second phase of the challenge due to privacy concerns.

The problem is how to define privacy for sharing data and how to publish/anonymize data to satisfy privacy while providing utility.

Key attributes such as name, address, and phone number uniquely identify individuals and are always removed before release.

Quasi-identifiers such as 5-digit ZIP code, birth date, and gender uniquely identify 87% of the population in the U.S.

Quasi-identifiers can be used for linking anonymized datasets with other datasets.

Sensitive attributes include medical records and salaries, which researchers need and are always released directly.

K-anonymity generalizes, modifies, or distorts quasi-identifier values so that no individual is uniquely identifiable from a group of k.

In SQL, table T is k-anonymous if each SELECT COUNT(*) FROM T GROUP BY Quasi-Identifier is ≥ k.

The parameter k indicates the degree of anonymity.

Each record in a k-anonymous table is indistinguishable from at least k-1 other records.

These k records form an equivalence class.

Generalization replaces quasi-identifiers with less specific but semantically consistent values.

The HIPAA Privacy Rule safe harbor method requires covered entities to remove all of a list of 18 enumerated identifiers.

The identifiers that must be removed include direct identifiers such as name, street address, and social security number.

Other identifiers that must be removed include birth date, admission and discharge dates, and five-digit zip code.

The safe harbor requires removal of geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, except for the initial three digits of a zip code if the geographic unit contains more than 20,000 people.

Age, if less than 90, gender, ethnicity, and other demographic information not listed may remain in the information.

K-anonymity does not prevent attribute disclosure if sensitive values lack diversity.

K-anonymity does not prevent attribute disclosure if the attacker has background knowledge.

The homogeneity attack occurs when sensitive values lack diversity.

The background knowledge attack occurs when the attacker has background knowledge.

Data Loss Prevention (DLP) focuses on protecting the most important data from loss, misuse, and access by unauthorized users.

DLP uses cybersecurity policies, processes, and technologies.

DLP software detects potential data breaches and data exfiltration transmissions.

DLP prevents data breaches by monitoring, detecting, and blocking sensitive data while in use, in motion, and at rest.

Examples of DLP tools include Google Cloud DLP, Symantec DLP (Broadcom), and Open DLP (Open source).

The global average cost of a data breach increased 10% in 2024, reaching USD 4.88 million.

Half of all breaches involved customer Personally Identifiable Information (PII).

DLP protects against data loss and breaches.

DLP provides visibility into how data is stored, accessed, and transmitted.

DLP helps identify vulnerabilities and manage risks more effectively.

DLP enforces compliance to policies.

The three types of DLP are Endpoint DLP, Network DLP, and Cloud DLP.

Endpoint DLP focuses on protecting data on individual devices such as computers, laptops, and mobile devices.

Network DLP monitors and controls data transfer across the network.

Cloud DLP protects data stored and transmitted in cloud environments.

Endpoint DLP solutions monitor activity on laptops, servers, mobile devices, and other devices accessing the network.

Endpoint DLP tools are installed directly on the devices they monitor.

Endpoint DLP stops users from committing prohibited actions on those devices, such as copying or modifying sensitive data.

Endpoint DLP blocks unapproved data transfers between devices.

Data-in-use locations include workstations, servers, and mobile devices/endpoints.

Areas to consider for data-in-use security and privacy controls include privileged user monitoring, access/usage monitoring, data anonymization, use of test data, data redaction, and export/save controls.

Network (Data-in-motion) DLP solutions focus on how data moves through, into, and out of a network.

Network DLP uses AI and ML to detect anomalous traffic flows that might signal a data leak or loss.

Encryption is often used in network DLP to ensure data remains safe during transmission.

DLP product capabilities for data-in-use include monitoring, blocking, and quarantining email.

DLP product capabilities include monitoring web mail, scanning social media, scanning internal blogs, and scanning files being printed.

DLP product capabilities include performing automatic encryption, observing user interaction with data, and displaying customizable messages to deter users from stealing.

DLP product capabilities include analyzing behavior using AI to detect data exfiltration.

Data-in-motion locations include email, web/internet, file transfers, data sharing, social media, instant messaging, blogs, and website postings.

Areas to consider for data-in-motion security and privacy controls include perimeter security, network monitoring, internet access control, data collection and exchange, information messaging, and remote access using VPN.

DLP product capabilities for data-in-motion include enforcing company DLP policies, detecting file movement, and monitoring instant messaging traffic.

DLP product capabilities include automatically encrypting network traffic and scanning incoming and outgoing file transfers.

DLP product capabilities include scanning email for credit and debit card numbers and intellectual property.

DLP product capabilities include reporting on USB and removable storage use via real-time alerts or logging.

Cloud (Data-at-rest) DLP solutions use techniques like encryption, access control, and data retention policies.

Data-at-rest locations include databases, local computers, intranet/internal websites, internal directory shares, organizational data and email archives, and mobile devices.

Areas to consider for data-at-rest security and privacy controls include controlling access ports, network/internet storage, physical media, mobile device protection, and encryption.

DLP product capabilities for data-at-rest include tagging assets based on data classification/sensitivity and scanning storage technology.

DLP product capabilities include providing HTTPS-based services, scanning local drives, and analyzing data in cloud storage.

DLP product capabilities include performing forensics analysis to track leaked documents and reporting on sensitive document printing.

DLP product capabilities include sending alerts if there is a policy violation and locating unencrypted sensitive data.

DLP product capabilities include implementing digital fingerprinting to mark files so they can be tracked.

The five steps of how DLP works are discovering and identifying data, classifying data, continuously monitoring data, taking action when violations are detected, and ongoing documentation and reporting.

DLP tools scan the entire network to discover data in the cloud, on physical endpoint devices, and on employees' personal devices.

DLP classifies data based on sensitivity level and shared characteristics.

Data can be grouped by type, such as financial data, marketing data, or intellectual property.

Data can be grouped by relevant regulations, such as GDPR or CCPA.

Classification can be automated using machine learning techniques that identify patterns through pattern matching.

DLP policy templates include the Credit Card Number classifier, which uses the pattern of digits, the issuer-specific prefix, and the final check digit.

To minimize false positives, additional supporting information can be added, such as an expiration date or the name of the card issuer.

The FERPA DLP policy template uses the Student Records classifier.

The FERPA template can be combined with a customized Student Identification Number classifier to detect specific student ID patterns.

The monitoring process compares data activities against set policies to identify potential breaches or abnormal behavior.

Methods used in monitoring include content analysis, keyword matching, exact data matching, pattern matching, and data fingerprinting.

Content analysis includes keyword matching and exact data matching.

Pattern matching classifies text by the likelihood that it fits into a category of protected data.

Data fingerprinting creates a unique digital fingerprint that can identify a specific file.

When violations are detected, actions include encrypting the data, blocking the transfer, and sending an alert to security personnel.

DLP dashboards provide insights into data activities and any incidents that occur.

DLP dashboards can be used to refine policies over time and ensure compliance with data protection regulations.

DLP dashboards provide an audit trail for reviewing incidents or threats that were identified and mitigated.

Google Drive security measures include blocking access to shared drives from unsecured devices.

Google Drive security measures include restricting access to modifying and moving files and folders.

Google Drive security measures include deleting user access in case of a stolen device.

A shared Google Drive DLP solution involves a rule, a DLP scan, an action, and alerts and reporting.

Step 1 of shared Google Drive DLP is to classify your data based on its sensitivity level.

Step 2 is to create a DLP-friendly drive structure with groups based on who needs access to what information.

Step 3 is to review access and sharing permissions, with the Manager role being the highest level of access and the Viewer role being the most restrictive.

Step 4 is to create a DLP policy for external file sharing.

Step 5 is to set up Google Drive DLP alerts, receiving an alert in the alert center every time there is a policy violation.

Step 5 also includes setting up Google Drive DLP reporting.

The file exposure report provides a complete breakdown of how file sharing exposes your organization's data.

The file exposure report shows the most frequently triggered DLP rules and the most frequently shared-to external domains.

The data protection insights report offers a candid look at your sensitive content.

Best practices for DLP include data classification, access controls, encryption, regular monitoring, employee training, and incident response.

Emerging technologies include Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning integration.

AI and ML analyze vast datasets, detect anomalies, and predict potential threats in real-time.

AI can detect and respond to cyber threats faster and more accurately than human teams.

Quantum-safe security involves adopting post-quantum cryptography (PQC) to prepare for the quantum revolution.

Existing encryption algorithms such as RSA and ECC can be a serious threat to data security in the quantum era.

Zero Trust Architecture assumes no user or device should be trusted by default, regardless of their location.

Zero Trust requires continuous verification of user identities and device integrity before granting access to databases.

Cloud security enforces security both at rest and in transit.

Cloud security strategies include data encryption, identity and access management (IAM), and regular security assessments.

Automated compliance monitoring provides continuous monitoring to detect non-compliant activities.

Automated compliance monitoring uses automated auditing and machine learning for data analytics.

Automated compliance monitoring provides instant notifications to avoid potential compliance violations.

Internet of Things (IoT) device data security includes encryption, access controls, and monitoring.

Blockchain for data integrity uses a decentralized database, providing secure storage for sensitive information.

Blockchain reduces cyber attack risks and guarantees data integrity by preventing unauthorized changes or tampering.

Blockchain offers data immutability, meaning once recorded, data cannot be deleted or updated.