A computer network is a group of computers connected through wires, optical fibres or optical links so that devices can interact.

The aim of a computer network is the sharing of resources among various devices.

The three high-level layers of network communication are hardware, operating system, and application.

At the hardware level, a network adapter is also called a network card, network interface card, or NIC.

Every network adapter has a 48-bit number hard coded by its manufacturer that is unique for that device.

Operating systems use IP addresses to find other computers on a network.

An IP address is a 32-bit or 128-bit ID assigned to a network connection when the connection is first made.

A MAC address is only used to find a computer on a local network, while an IP address can find a computer anywhere on the Internet.

Most applications used on the Internet or a local network are client/server applications.

Server applications provide services to client applications.

Each client and server application listens at a predetermined address called a port number, port, or port address.

A NIC is a device that helps the computer to communicate with another device.

The two types of NIC are wireless NIC and wired NIC.

A hub is a basic networking device that connects multiple devices in a network, making them act as a single network segment.

A hub sends incoming data packets to all ports, regardless of the destination device.

Hubs operate in half-duplex mode, meaning devices can either send or receive data at one time, but not both.

A switch sends incoming data packets only to the port connected to the destination device.

Switches can operate in full-duplex mode, allowing devices to send and receive data simultaneously.

Twisted pair cable is a high-speed cable that transmits data over 1Gbps or more.

Coaxial cable resembles a TV installation cable and is more expensive than twisted pair cable.

Fibre optic cable transmits data using light beams and provides high data transmission speed.

A router is a device that connects the LAN to the internet.

The router is mainly used to connect distinct networks or connect the Internet to multiple computers.

Communication speed means a network provides us to communicate over the network in a fast and efficient manner.

File sharing is one of the major advantages of the computer network.

Backup and roll back is easy because files are stored in the main server which is centrally located.

Software and hardware sharing allows applications to be installed on the main server and accessed centrally.

Security in a network ensures that the user has the right to access certain files and applications.

Scalability means that we can add new components on the network.

The way in which data is transmitted from one device to another device is known as transmission mode.

In Simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional, meaning data flows in one direction.

In Simplex mode, the station can utilize the entire bandwidth of the communication channel.

In Half-duplex channel, direction can be reversed, meaning the station can transmit and receive data.

In half-duplex mode, messages flow in both directions, but not at the same time.

In half-duplex mode, when one device is sending data, another has to wait, causing delay.

In Full duplex mode, the communication is bi-directional, meaning data flows in both directions.

In Full duplex mode, both stations can send and receive messages simultaneously.

The Full-duplex mode is the fastest mode of communication between devices.

Computer Network Architecture is defined as the physical and logical design of software, hardware, protocols, and media.

The two types of network architectures are Peer-To-Peer network and Client/Server network.

In a Client/Server network, the central controller is known as a server while all other computers are called clients.

In a Client/Server network, a server performs all major operations such as security and network management.

In a Client/Server network, all clients communicate with each other through a server.

In a Client/Server network, centralized servers make it easier to manage, control, and update the network.

In a Client/Server network, setting up and maintaining can be expensive due to dedicated servers.

In a Client/Server network, the central server represents a single point of failure.

Peer-To-Peer network is a network in which all computers are linked together with equal privilege and responsibilities.

Peer-To-Peer network has no dedicated server.

Peer-To-Peer network is useful for small environments, usually up to 10 computers.

In Peer-To-Peer network, resources like files, storage, and bandwidth can be shared directly between peers.

In Peer-To-Peer network, decentralized control can make it difficult to manage and administer the network.

A LAN is a network that connects computers and devices within a limited geographic area.

A PAN is a network for interconnecting devices centered around an individual person's workspace.

A MAN is a network that spans a metropolitan area, connecting multiple LANs within a city or a large campus.

A WAN is a network that spans a large geographic area, often a country or continent, connecting multiple LANs.

Point-to-point network topology is the simplest network topology used when only two computers are connected.

In a bus topology, the main cable is called a common cable or a backbone cable.

Terminators are devices installed on each end of the backbone cable to absorb signals and avoid reflecting signals back.

Token Bus standard is used to create a logical token ring in networks built using the bus topology.

In the ring network topology, each station is connected to two other stations on either side.

The ring topology works in half-duplex mode because data travels sequentially in one direction.

The star topology requires a centralized unit called a switch, and all other network devices connect to this switch.

In star topology, there are no direct physical connections between the two stations.

The tree network topology is an extension of the star topology and is widely used nowadays.

Network security is essential in safeguarding sensitive data from unauthorized access, misuse, or destruction.

Confidentiality ensures that data is accessed only by authorized individuals.

Integrity guarantees that data remains accurate and unaltered during storage or transmission.

Availability ensures that network services are accessible to users when needed.

Malware is malicious software such as viruses, worms, and trojans that can damage or steal data.

Phishing is fraudulent attempts to obtain sensitive information by disguising as trustworthy entities.

Man-in-the-Middle attacks intercept communication between two parties to steal or alter data.

Denial of Service attacks overload a network or server to disrupt services.

Firewalls are devices or software that monitor and control incoming and outgoing network traffic based on security rules.

Intrusion Detection Systems monitor network traffic for suspicious activity.

Intrusion Prevention Systems take action to prevent detected threats.

Virtual Private Networks encrypt data transmitted over the internet, ensuring secure remote access.

Antivirus and Anti-malware Software protects systems from malicious software by detecting and removing threats.

Strong Password Policies use complex passwords and multi-factor authentication for additional security.

Network Segmentation divides the network into smaller segments to limit access and contain potential breaches.

Zero Trust Architecture requires strict identity verification for every person and device trying to access resources.

WannaCry ransomware attack targeted computers running Microsoft Windows by encrypting data and demanding ransom.

Equifax data breach exploited a vulnerability in the Apache Struts web application framework.

Target data breach used stolen credentials from a third-party vendor to access Target's network.

Yahoo data breaches exposed data from all three billion user accounts.

Stuxnet worm targeted Iran's nuclear facilities, specifically the centrifuges used for uranium enrichment.

A layered approach divides networking concepts into several layers, with each layer assigned a particular task.

The main aim of layered architecture is to have a module design.

Each lower layer adds its services to the higher layer to provide a full set of services.

Layered architecture ensures independence between layers by providing services from lower to higher layer without defining implementation.

Any modification in a layer will not affect the other layers in layered architecture.

The basic elements of layered architecture are services, protocols, and interfaces.

Service is a set of actions that a layer provides to the higher layer.

Protocol defines a set of rules that a layer uses to exchange information with peer entity.

Interface is a way through which the message is transferred from one layer to another layer.

In layered architecture, no data is transferred from layer n of one machine to layer n of another machine.

Each layer passes the data to the layer immediately just below it until the lowest layer is reached.

Below layer 1 is the physical medium through which the actual communication takes place.

A layered architecture provides a clean-cut interface so that minimum information is shared among different layers.

Divide-and-conquer approach reduces the complexity of the design by dividing unmanageable tasks into small manageable tasks.

Modularity in layered architecture provides independence of layers, which is easier to understand and implement.

Each layer of the layered architecture can be analyzed and tested individually.

OSI stands for Open System Interconnection and is a reference model for how information moves through a physical medium.

OSI consists of seven layers, and each layer performs a particular network function.

OSI model was developed by the International Organization for Standardization in 1984.

OSI model divides the whole task into seven smaller and manageable tasks.

Each layer is self-contained so that the task assigned to each layer can be performed independently.

The seven layers of the OSI model are Physical, Data-Link, Network, Transport, Session, Presentation, and Application.

The physical layer transmits individual bits from one node to another node.

Line configuration defines the way how two or more devices can be connected physically.

Data transmission defines the transmission mode whether it is simplex, half-duplex or full-duplex.

The physical layer determines the type of the signal used for transmitting the information.

Framing translates the physical's raw bit stream into packets known as frames.

The data link layer adds the header and trailer to the frame.

The header added to the frame contains the hardware destination and source address.

Error control is achieved by adding a calculated value CRC that is placed in the data link layer's trailer.

When two or more devices are connected to the same communication channel, data link layer protocols determine which device has control over the link.

Internetworking is the main responsibility of the network layer and provides a logical connection between different devices.

The network layer adds the source and destination address to the header of the frame.

Routing is the major component of the network layer and determines the best optimal path from source to destination.

Packetizing receives the packets from the upper layer and converts them into packets.

Service-point addressing adds a header that contains the address known as a service-point address or port address.

Segmentation divides the message into multiple segments, and each segment is assigned a sequence number.

Connection control provides two services: connection-oriented service and connectionless service.

Flow control in the transport layer is performed end-to-end rather than across a single link.

Session management handles the setup and teardown of sessions.

Synchronization and recovery adds checkpoints when transmitting data in a sequence.

Translation handles interoperability between different encoding methods.

Encryption is a process of converting the sender-transmitted information into another form.

Data compression reduces the number of bits to be transmitted.

File transfer, access, and management allows a user to access files in a remote computer.

Mail services provide the facility for email forwarding and storage.

Directory services provide distributed database sources and global information about various objects.

The TCP/IP model was developed prior to the OSI model.

The TCP/IP model commonly consists of four layers: Application, Transport, Internet/Network, and Network Interface.

The network interface layer is the combination of the Physical layer and Data Link layer defined in the OSI reference model.

The network interface layer defines how data should be sent physically through the network.

IP protocol is used in the network layer and is the most significant part of the entire TCP/IP suite.

IP addressing implements logical host addresses known as IP addresses.

Fragmentation splits the datagram into smaller units so that they can travel over the local network.

Routing accomplishes sending IP datagrams indirectly through various devices such as routers.

ARP stands for Address Resolution Protocol and is used to find the physical address from the IP address.

ARP request is broadcast to the network when a sender wants to know the physical address of a device.

ICMP stands for Internet Control Message Protocol and is used to send notifications regarding datagram problems.

The transport layer is responsible for reliability, flow control, and correction of data.

The two protocols used in the transport layer are User Datagram Protocol and Transmission Control Protocol.

User Datagram Protocol provides connectionless service and end-to-end delivery of transmission.

Transmission Control Protocol creates a virtual circuit between the sender and receiver.

TCP is a reliable protocol as it detects the error and retransmits the damaged frames.

TCP divides the whole message into smaller units known as segments at the sending end.

The application layer allows the user to interact with the application.

HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol and allows access to data over the world wide web.

DNS stands for Domain Name System and maps the name to the address.

DHCP stands for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol and automatically assigns IP addresses.

SMTP stands for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol and is used by email servers to send and receive emails.

The Internet Protocol is the method by which data is sent from one computer to another on the Internet.

Each computer known as a host on the Internet has at least one IP address that uniquely identifies it.

When data is sent or received, the message gets divided into little chunks called packets.

Each packet contains both the sender's Internet address and the receiver's address.

Every layer along the path either adds header info on the sender side or strips off the header on the receiver side.

The IP packet consists of a header plus payload data.

Version in the IP header indicates IPv4 or IPv6.

IHL stands for Intermediate Header Length and is the actual length of the header in multiples of 32-bit.

Type of Service in the IP header is used for prioritization.

Total Length is the length of the Header and payload part.

Identification enables the reconstruction of the initial datagram at the receiver.

Flags indicate if fragmentation is allowed and if more packets are associated with the current one.

Fragment Offset is the position of the first byte in this packet in relation to the original datagram.

All fragments are in multiples of 8 bytes except for the last one.

Time to Live is the max time this packet will live on the internet.

Protocol indicates the next higher level protocol such as TCP or UDP.

Header Checksum safeguards the header against corruption during transmission.

Source Address is the Internet-wide IP address of the source.

Destination Address is the Internet-wide IP address of the destination.

Options in the IP header include security, src routing, and loose src routing.

Padding consists of extra bits that complete the multiple of 32-bit.

Fragmentation and reassembly occur when a datagram is larger than the Maximum Transmission Unit.

Schemes used to allocate IP addresses include class-based addresses, subnetting, classless addresses, and NAT.

Class A addresses have 7 bits for netid and 24 bits for hostid.

Class B addresses have 14 bits for netid and 16 bits for hostid.

Class C addresses have 21 bits for netid and 8 bits for hostid.

Class D addresses are multicast addresses.

Class E addresses are reserved.

An address with a hostid of all 0's refers to the network in the netid part rather than a particular host.

An address with a netid of all 0's refers to the same network as the source.

An address with all 1's means broadcast the packet over the source network.

An address with a hostid of all 1's means broadcast the packet over the network of the netid.

A Class A address with netid of all 1's is known as a loopback address.

All LANs of a site are assigned a netid.

Subnetting means each LAN is known as a subnet instead of assigning each LAN with a netid.

The identity of the subnet forms part of the hostid in subnetting.

Subnetting introduces the concept of Address/Subnet mask.

An address mask has all 1's in the netid and subnetid positions and all 0's in the hostid part.

The presence of a possible large number of subnets is transparent to all Internet gateways and routers.

Classless addressing means the network part of an IP address can be any number of bits.

Classless addresses are represented as w.x.y.z / n where n indicates the number of bits in the network part.

Classless addressing allows more efficient use of the address space but routing is more complicated.

Classless inter-domain routing is known as CIDR.

An organisation requesting a block of 1000 host addresses would be allocated a block of 1024 addresses.

NAT stands for Network Address Translation.

A large site is allocated a single IP address for Internet-wide communication.

Three blocks of addresses have been declared as private and can be allocated to any local network.

The private address block 10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255/8 supports 2 to the power of 24 hosts.

The private address block 172.10.0.0 to 172.31.255.255/12 supports 2 to the power of 20 hosts.

The private address block 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255/16 supports 2 to the power of 16 hosts.

A NAT table is associated with the site NAT gateway or router.

The Internet is a network of interconnected ISPs.

Hosts are end systems running network apps at the Internet's edge.

Packet switches forward packets, which are chunks of data.

Routers and switches are examples of packet switches.

Communication links include fiber, copper, radio, and satellite.

Bandwidth is the transmission rate of a communication link.

A network is a collection of devices, routers, and links managed by an organization.

Protocols control the sending and receiving of messages.

Examples of protocols include HTTP, TCP, IP, WiFi, 4G, and Ethernet.

Internet standards are documented in RFCs and managed by the IETF.

The Internet provides infrastructure that provides services to applications.

Applications include Web, streaming video, multimedia teleconferencing, email, games, and e-commerce.

The Internet provides a programming interface to distributed applications.

Protocols define the format and order of messages sent and received among network entities.

Protocols define actions taken on message transmission and receipt.

The network edge consists of hosts, clients, and servers.

Servers are often located in data centers.

Access networks include wired and wireless communication links.

The network core consists of interconnected routers forming a network of networks.

Access networks include residential, institutional, and mobile access networks.

Transmission rate of an access network is measured in bits per second.

Access networks can be shared or dedicated among users.

Home networks often combine a WiFi access point, router, firewall, NAT, and modem in a single box.

WiFi wireless access point supports 54 to 450 Mbps.

Wired Ethernet in home networks supports 1 Gbps.

Wireless local area networks typically operate within or around a building.

802.11 WiFi supports 600 Mbps at 2.4GHz and 1300 Mbps at 5GHz.

Wide-area cellular access networks are provided by mobile cellular network operators.

4G and 5G cellular networks support 100's to 1000's of Mbps.

Enterprise networks include a mix of wired and wireless link technologies.

Ethernet in enterprise networks supports 100Mbps, 1Gbps, and 10Gbps.

WiFi access points in enterprise networks support 100's to 1000's of Mbps.

A host takes an application message and breaks it into smaller chunks known as packets.

Packets have a length of L bits.

The host transmits packets into the access network at transmission rate R.

Link transmission rate is also known as link capacity or link bandwidth.

Packet transmission time equals L bits divided by R bits per second.

Bits propagate between transmitter and receiver pairs.

Physical links can be guided media such as copper, fiber, and coax.

Unguided media means signals propagate freely, such as radio.

Twisted pair is made up of twisted copper wires.

Category 5 twisted pair supports 100 Mbps and 1 Gbps Ethernet.

Category 6 twisted pair supports 10Gbps Ethernet.

Coaxial cable has two concentric copper conductors and is bidirectional.

Coaxial cable is broadband, supporting multiple frequency channels.

Fiber optic cable carries light pulses, each pulse a bit.

Fiber optic cable supports high-speed point-to-point transmission of 10's to 100's Gbps.

Fiber optic cable has a low error rate and is immune to electromagnetic noise.

Wireless radio signals are carried in the electromagnetic spectrum.

Radio link types include terrestrial microwave, wireless LAN, wide-area cellular, and satellite.

Terrestrial microwave supports up to 45 Mbps channels.

Satellite radio supports up to 45 Mbps per channel.

The network core is a mesh of interconnected routers.

Packet switching means hosts break application-layer messages into packets.

Packets are forwarded from one router to the next across links on the path from source to destination.

Each packet is transmitted at full link capacity in packet switching.

Store and forward means an entire packet must arrive at a router before it can be transmitted on the next link.

End-to-end delay in store and forward is 2L/R assuming zero propagation delay.

Packet queuing occurs when arrival rate to a link exceeds the transmission rate of the link.

Packets can be dropped or lost if the memory buffer in a router fills up.

Forwarding is a local action that moves arriving packets from a router's input link to the appropriate output link.

Routing is a global action that determines source-destination paths taken by packets.

Circuit switching allocates end-to-end resources reserved for a call between source and destination.

Circuit switching provides dedicated resources with no sharing.

Circuit switching provides circuit-like guaranteed performance.

Circuit switching is commonly used in traditional telephone networks.

Frequency Division Multiplexing divides optical or electromagnetic frequencies into narrow frequency bands.

Time Division Multiplexing divides time into slots and each call is allocated periodic slots.

Packet switching is great for bursty data and provides resource sharing.

Packet switching has simpler operation with no call setup.

Packet switching can suffer from excessive congestion, packet delay, and loss due to buffer overflow.

Protocols are needed for reliable data transfer and congestion control in packet switching.

Access ISPs include residential, enterprise, company, university, and commercial ISPs.

Access ISPs must be interconnected so any two hosts can send packets to each other.

Connecting each access ISP to each other directly does not scale.

A global transit ISP can connect access ISPs with economic agreements between customer and provider ISPs.

Internet Exchange Points allow ISPs to interconnect.

Peering links connect ISPs at Internet Exchange Points.

Tier-1 commercial ISPs have national and international coverage.

Examples of tier-1 ISPs include Sprint and AT&T.

Content provider networks such as Google and Facebook connect their data centers to the Internet.

Content provider networks often bypass tier-1 and regional ISPs.

POP stands for point-of-presence.

1 bit equals 0 or 1, which is one binary digit.

1 Kilobit equals 1000 bits.

1 Megabit equals 1,000,000 bits.

1 Gigabit equals 1,000,000,000 bits.

1 byte equals 8 bits.

1 Kilobyte equals 1024 bytes.

1 Megabyte equals 1,048,576 bytes.

1 Gigabyte equals 1,073,741,824 bytes.

1 Terabyte equals 1,099,511,627,776 bytes.

The time required to examine a packet's header and determine where to direct the packet is part of the processing delay.

Processing delay can include the time needed to check for bit-level errors in the packet.

Processing delays in high-speed routers are typically on the order of microseconds or less.

After nodal processing, the router directs the packet to the queue that precedes the link to the next router.

At the queue, a packet experiences a queuing delay as it waits to be transmitted onto the link.

The length of the queuing delay depends on the number of earlier-arriving packets that are queued and waiting for transmission.

If the queue is empty and no other packet is currently being transmitted, the queuing delay will be zero.

If the traffic is heavy and many other packets are waiting to be transmitted, the queuing delay will be long.

Queuing delays can be on the order of microseconds to milliseconds in practice.

Packets are transmitted in a first-come-first-served manner in packet-switched networks.

The transmission delay is L/R, where L is the packet length in bits and R is the transmission rate.

Transmission delay is the amount of time required to push all of the packet's bits into the link.

Transmission delays are typically on the order of microseconds to milliseconds in practice.

Once a bit is pushed into the link, it needs to propagate to the next router.

The time required to propagate from the beginning of the link to the next router is the propagation delay.

The bit propagates at the propagation speed of the link.

Propagation speed depends on the physical medium of the link and is in the range of 2 x 10^8 to 3 x 10^8 meters per second.

The propagation delay is the distance between two routers divided by the propagation speed.

The propagation delay is d/s, where d is the distance and s is the propagation speed of the link.

In wide-area networks, propagation delays are on the order of milliseconds.

A queue preceding a link has finite capacity in reality.

A packet can arrive to find a full queue.

A router will drop a packet if there is no place to store it, meaning the packet will be lost.

A packet loss looks like a packet having been transmitted into the network core but never emerging at the destination.

Lost packets may be retransmitted by the previous node, by the source end system, or not at all.

The total delay from source to destination is the end-to-end delay.

Suppose there are N - 1 routers between the source host and the destination host.

The end-to-end delay formula is N times the sum of d_proc, d_trans, and d_prop.

The end-to-end delay formula assumes an uncongested network with negligible queuing delays.

Another critical performance measure in computer networks is end-to-end throughput.

Instantaneous throughput is the rate at which a host is receiving a file.

If a file consists of F bits and the transfer takes T seconds, the average throughput is F/T bits/sec.

Throughput is the rate at which bits are being sent from sender to receiver.

Instantaneous throughput is the rate at a given point in time.

Average throughput is the rate over a longer period of time.

The bottleneck link is the link on the end-to-end path that constrains end-to-end throughput.

Per-connection end-to-end throughput is the minimum of R_c, R_s, and R/10 in a shared backbone scenario.

In practice, R_c or R_s is often the bottleneck.

The transmission delay for a packet of length L bits over a link with transmission rate R Mbps is L/R.

The propagation delay for a bit over a link of distance d with propagation speed s is d/s.

Propagation delay does not depend on packet length.

Propagation delay does not depend on transmission rate.


Creating a network app involves writing programs that run on different end systems and communicate over the network.

Network-core devices do not run user applications.

In client-server paradigm, the server is an always-on host with a permanent IP address.

In client-server paradigm, clients communicate with the server and may be intermittently connected.

In client-server paradigm, clients may have dynamic IP addresses.

In client-server paradigm, clients do not communicate directly with each other.

In peer-to-peer architecture, there is no always-on server.

In peer-to-peer architecture, arbitrary end systems directly communicate.

In peer-to-peer architecture, peers request service from other peers and provide service in return.

Peer-to-peer architecture has self scalability because new peers bring new service capacity and new service demands.

In peer-to-peer architecture, peers are intermittently connected and change IP addresses.

A process is a program running within a host.

Within the same host, two processes communicate using inter-process communication defined by the OS.

Processes in different hosts communicate by exchanging messages.

A client process is a process that initiates communication.

A server process is a process that waits to be contacted.

Applications with P2P architectures have client processes and server processes.

To receive messages, a process must have an identifier.

A host device has a unique 32-bit IP address.

An identifier for a process includes both the IP address and port numbers associated with the process on the host.

HTTP server uses port number 80.

Mail server uses port number 25.

An application-layer protocol defines the types of messages exchanged, such as request and response.

An application-layer protocol defines message syntax, which is what fields are in messages and how fields are delineated.

An application-layer protocol defines rules for when and how processes send and respond to messages.

Open protocols are defined in RFCs and everyone has access to the protocol definition.

Open protocols allow for interoperability.

Examples of open protocols are HTTP and SMTP.

Proprietary protocols are not open, such as Skype.

Data integrity means some apps require 100% reliable data transfer while other apps can tolerate some loss.

Timing means some apps require low delay to be effective.

Throughput means some apps require a minimum amount of throughput to be effective.

Elastic apps make use of whatever throughput they get.

Security in transport services includes encryption and data integrity.

TCP service provides reliable transport between sending and receiving processes.

TCP service provides flow control so the sender won't overwhelm the receiver.

TCP service provides congestion control to throttle the sender when the network is overloaded.

TCP service does not provide timing, minimum throughput guarantee, or security.

TCP service is connection-oriented, requiring setup between client and server processes.

UDP service provides unreliable data transfer between sending and receiving processes.

UDP service does not provide reliability, flow control, congestion control, timing, throughput guarantee, security, or connection setup.

HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol.

HTTP is the Web's application layer protocol.

HTTP uses a client/server model where the browser sends requests and receives Web objects.

HTTP uses a client/server model where the Web server sends objects in response to requests.

HTTP uses TCP.

The client initiates a TCP connection to the server on port 80.

The server accepts the TCP connection from the client.

HTTP messages are exchanged between the browser as HTTP client and the Web server as HTTP server.

Non-persistent HTTP opens a TCP connection, sends at most one object, then closes the connection.

Downloading multiple objects with non-persistent HTTP requires multiple connections.

Persistent HTTP allows multiple objects to be sent over a single TCP connection.

RTT is the time for a small packet to travel from client to server and back.

Non-persistent HTTP response time per object is two RTTs plus file transmission time.

Persistent HTTP requires as little as one RTT for all referenced objects.

HTTP request message is in ASCII human-readable format.

The request line of an HTTP request message includes the method, URL, and version.

HTTP methods include GET, POST, HEAD, and PUT.

POST method sends user input from client to server in the entity body of the HTTP request message.

GET method can include user data in the URL field following a question mark.

HEAD method requests headers only that would be returned if the URL were requested with GET.

PUT method uploads a new file to the server and completely replaces the file at the specified URL.

HTTP response message includes a status line with protocol version, status code, and status phrase.

Status code 200 OK means the request succeeded and the requested object is later in the message.

Status code 301 Moved Permanently means the requested object moved and the new location is specified in the Location field.

Status code 400 Bad Request means the request message was not understood by the server.

Status code 404 Not Found means the requested document was not found on the server.

Status code 505 HTTP Version Not Supported means the HTTP version is not supported.

A web cache acts as both a client and a server.

A web cache is a server for the original requesting client.

A web cache is a client to the origin server.

A web cache is typically installed by an ISP such as a university, company, or residential ISP.

The goal of a web cache is to satisfy a client request without involving the origin server.

The user configures the browser to point to a Web cache.


The browser sends all requests to the cache.

If the object is in the cache, the cache returns the object to the client.

If the object is not in the cache, the cache requests the object from the origin server, caches it, then returns it to the client.

Web caching reduces response time for client requests because the cache is closer to the client.

Web caching reduces traffic on an institution's access link.

The Internet is dense with caches.

Web caching enables poor content providers to more effectively deliver content.

As link utilization approaches 1, the delay on a link becomes very large and grows without bound.

When traffic intensity is close to zero, the average queuing delay is close to zero.

When link utilization is close to 1, intervals occur when arrival rate exceeds transmission capacity and a queue forms.

As traffic intensity approaches 1, the average queue length gets larger and larger.

Buying a faster access link can reduce utilization but is expensive.

Installing a web cache can lower average end-to-end delay and is cheaper than buying a faster link.

With a cache hit rate of 0.4, 40% of requests are satisfied at the cache and 60% at the origin.

With a hit rate of 0.4, access link utilization is 0.58.

With a hit rate of 0.4, average end-to-end delay is approximately 0.6 seconds.

A forward proxy sits in front of a client and ensures that no origin server ever communicates directly with that specific client.

In a forward proxy, the user's device sends requests to the proxy, which forwards the request to the origin server.

The origin server sends a response to the proxy, which forwards the response back to the user's device.

A forward proxy can block access to certain content.

A forward proxy can bypass state or institutional browsing restrictions.

A forward proxy can protect a user's identity online.

A forward proxy can be used for caching to save bandwidth on the access link.

A reverse proxy sits in front of one or more web servers and intercepts requests from clients.

With a reverse proxy, clients send requests to the origin server, but these requests are intercepted at the network edge by the reverse proxy.

The reverse proxy sends requests to and receives responses from the origin server.

A reverse proxy sits in front of an origin server and ensures that no client ever communicates directly with that origin server.

A reverse proxy can provide load balancing by distributing incoming traffic evenly among different servers.

A reverse proxy can protect from attacks because the origin server's IP address is never revealed.

A reverse proxy can cache content, resulting in faster performance.

A reverse proxy can handle SSL encryption and decryption to free up resources on the origin server.

Content Distribution Networks store copies of content at CDN nodes.

A single large mega-server does not scale due to single point of failure, network congestion, and long paths to distant clients.

A CDN stores and serves multiple copies of videos at multiple geographically distributed sites.

A subscriber requesting content from a CDN is directed to a nearby copy.

A CDN may choose a different copy if the network path is congested.

Internet addressing is used to identify the unique location of an internet node.

Naming provides a second layer of direction that is location-independent and human-friendly.

Routing moves data from source to destination.

In a URL, http indicates the conventions to serve web pages.

In a URL, www indicates the computer acting as a web server.

In a URL, the domain name identifies the server.

DNS predecessor used a flat file called HOSTS.TXT for name to address mappings.

HOSTS.TXT was maintained by the Network Information Center.

HOSTS.TXT was updated nightly by all internet hosts using FTP.

Problems with HOSTS.TXT included bandwidth for file transfers and load on FTP servers.

DNS stands for Domain Name System.

DNS is a distributed database implemented in a hierarchy of many name servers.

DNS is an application-layer protocol where hosts and name servers communicate to resolve names.

DNS is a core Internet function implemented as an application-layer protocol.

DNS services include hostname to IP address translation.

DNS services include host aliasing and mail server aliasing.

DNS services include load distribution for replicated Web servers.

Centralizing DNS would create a single point of failure and traffic volume problems.

A centralized DNS database would be distant and require maintenance.

Comcast DNS servers alone handle 600 billion DNS queries per day.

DNS uses a distributed, hierarchical database.

The DNS hierarchy includes root DNS servers, top-level domain DNS servers, and authoritative DNS servers.

Root DNS servers are the official contact of last resort by name servers that cannot resolve a name.

There are 13 logical root name servers worldwide.

DNSSEC provides security including authentication and message integrity.

ICANN manages the root DNS domain.

Top-level domain servers are responsible for .com, .org, .net, .edu, and all top-level country domains.

VeriSign Global Registry Services is the authoritative registry for the .com TLD.

Educause is the authoritative registry for the .edu TLD.

Authoritative DNS servers provide authoritative hostname to IP mappings for an organization's named hosts.

Each ISP has a local DNS server also called a default name server.

A host's DNS query is sent to its local DNS server.

Local DNS servers have a local cache of recent name-to-address translation pairs.

Local DNS servers act as a proxy and forward queries into the hierarchy.

Recursive query puts the burden of name resolution on the contacted name server.

Iterated query means the contacted server replies with the name of the server to contact.

Once any name server learns a mapping, it caches the mapping.

Cache entries timeout after some time based on TTL.

TLD servers are typically cached in local name servers so root name servers are not often visited.

Cached entries may be out of date, which is best-effort name-to-address translation.

If a name host changes its IP address, it may not be known Internet-wide until all TTLs expire.

RFC 2136 defines update and notify mechanisms for DNS.

DNS is a distributed database storing resource records.

Resource record format is host, class, ttl, type, data.

DNS query and reply messages both have the same format.

DNS message header includes a 16-bit identification number for the query.

The reply to a query uses the same identification number as the query.

DNS message flags include query or reply, recursion desired, recursion available, and reply is authoritative.

Resource record type A maps a hostname to an IPv4 address.

Resource record type CNAME maps an alias to a canonical name.

Resource record type MX maps a domain to a mail server.

Resource record type NS maps a domain to an authoritative name server.

Resource record type SOA indicates the start of authority for a zone.

To insert records into DNS, a new startup registers its name at a DNS registrar.

The registrar inserts NS and A resource records into the TLD server.

The organization creates an authoritative server with its own IP address.

DNS is vulnerable to DDoS attacks that bombard root servers with traffic.

Traffic filtering and local DNS server caching help protect against DDoS attacks on root servers.

Redirect attacks on DNS include man-in-the-middle interception of DNS queries.

DNS poisoning involves sending bogus replies to a DNS server which caches them.

DNS can be exploited for DDoS by sending queries with spoofed source addresses.

A DDoS attack against the top-level-domain service provider Dyn took place on October 21, 2016.

The Dyn attack used a botnet of about one hundred thousand IoT devices infected with Mirai malware.

A large-scale DDoS attack against DNS root servers took place on October 21, 2002.

The 2002 attack used a botnet to send ICMP ping messages to the 13 DNS root IP addresses.

Packet filters blocked ICMP ping messages directed at root servers during the 2002 attack.

When a browser requests a URL, the host must first obtain the IP address of the web server.

The browser extracts the hostname from the URL and passes it to the DNS client.

The DNS client sends a query containing the hostname to a DNS server.

The DNS client receives a reply that includes the IP address for the hostname.

Once the browser receives the IP address from DNS, it can initiate a TCP connection to the HTTP server at port 80.

Before a client can fetch a web page, it needs to translate the hostname to an IP address using DNS.

DNS lookup needs to happen for every unique hostname on a fetched HTML page, but only once per hostname.

Connection delay is the time to setup a connection from the client to the server using TCP.

TLS negotiation delay occurs if the client is making an HTTPS connection.

TLS is the successor to Secure Socket Layer.

Time to first byte is the measurement of the responsiveness of a web server.

TTFB is the time it takes your browser to start receiving information after it has requested it from the server.

TTFB is the measure of time from when the client starts navigation to a web page until the first byte of the base page response is received.

TTFB is a sum of many preceding metrics as well as any server processing time.

Content download time is the Time to Last Byte for the requested object.

DNS load balancing configures a domain so that client requests are distributed across a group of server machines.

Round-robin DNS uses domains with multiple A records, each tied to a different IP address.

With round-robin DNS, IP addresses rotate in a round-robin fashion as DNS queries come in.

An IP address is a 32-bit identifier associated with each host or router interface.

An interface is the connection between a host or router and a physical link.

Routers typically have multiple interfaces.

A host typically has one or two interfaces, such as wired Ethernet or wireless 802.11.

Dotted-decimal IP address notation represents a 32-bit address as four decimal numbers separated by dots.

A subnet is a group of device interfaces that can physically reach each other without passing through an intervening router.

IP addresses have a structure consisting of a subnet part and a host part.

Devices in the same subnet have common high-order bits in the subnet part.

The remaining low-order bits form the host part of the IP address.

A subnet mask of /24 means the high-order 24 bits are the subnet part of the IP address.

CIDR stands for Classless InterDomain Routing and is pronounced "cider".

CIDR allows the subnet portion of an address to be of arbitrary length.

The CIDR address format is a.b.c.d/x, where x is the number of bits in the subnet portion.

A host can get its IP address by being hard-coded by a system administrator in a config file.

DHCP stands for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol and allows a host to dynamically get an address from a server.

DHCP is often described as plug-and-play networking.

The goal of DHCP is for a host to dynamically obtain an IP address from a network server when it joins the network.

DHCP allows a host to renew its lease on an address in use.

DHCP allows reuse of addresses because a host only holds an address while connected.

DHCP supports mobile users who join and leave a network.

The DHCP overview includes DHCP discover, DHCP offer, DHCP request, and DHCP ACK messages.

A host broadcasts a DHCP discover message optionally.

The DHCP server responds with a DHCP offer message optionally.

The host requests an IP address with a DHCP request message.

The DHCP server sends the address with a DHCP ACK message.

A DHCP server is typically co-located in a router, serving all subnets to which the router is attached.

The DHCP discover and offer steps can be skipped if a client remembers and wishes to reuse a previously allocated network address.


DHCP can return more than just the allocated IP address on the subnet.

DHCP can return the address of the first-hop router for the client.

DHCP can return the name and IP address of the DNS server.

DHCP can return the network mask indicating the network versus host portion of the address.

A DHCP request message is encapsulated in UDP, then in IP, then in Ethernet.

An Ethernet frame is broadcast on the LAN and received at the router running the DHCP server.

The DHCP server formulates a DHCP ACK containing the client's IP address, the IP address of the first-hop router, and the name and IP address of the DNS server.

After DHCP, the client knows its IP address, the name and address of the DNS server, and the IP address of its first-hop router.

A static IP address can be configured on an interface using the address keyword with a subnet prefix length.

DHCP can be enabled on an interface by setting dhcp4 to true in the netplan configuration.

Multiple addresses and multiple gateways can be configured on an interface.

Multiple interfaces can be connected with DHCP using route metrics.

Multiple addresses can be assigned to a single interface with labels.

DNS servers and search domains can be configured in the netplan configuration.

The default lease time in a DHCP server configuration is 600 seconds or 10 minutes.

The maximum lease time in a DHCP server configuration is 7200 seconds or 2 hours.

A DHCP server marked as authoritative is the official server for the local network.

A DHCP server hands over IP addresses from a defined range.

A DHCP server advises the client to use specific default gateway and DNS server addresses.

A static IP can be assigned to a client by reserving an IP address for a specific MAC address.

The DHCP server needs the MAC address of a client to guarantee that the client always gets the same IP address.

When a mobile client attaches to a network, it uses DHCP to get its own IP address, the address of the first-hop router, and the address of the DNS server.

Before sending an HTTP request, the client needs the IP address of the web server using DNS.

To send a frame to the router, the client needs the MAC address of the router interface using ARP.

ARP query is broadcast and received by the router, which replies with an ARP reply giving its MAC address.

After ARP, the client knows the MAC address of the first-hop router and can send a frame containing the DNS query.

The DNS query is encapsulated in UDP, then in IP, then in Ethernet.

The DNS server replies to the client with the IP address of the web server.

To send an HTTP request, the client first opens a TCP socket to the web server.

TCP sends a SYN message to the web server.

The web server responds with a TCP SYN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT message.

After the TCP connection is established, the HTTP request is sent into the TCP socket.

The IP datagram containing the HTTP request is routed to the web server.

The web server responds with an HTTP reply containing the web page.

The IP datagram containing the HTTP reply is routed back to the client.

The three major components of email are user agents, mail servers, and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.

A user agent is also known as a mail reader.

User agents are used for composing, editing, and reading mail messages.

Examples of user agents include Outlook and Web-based Gmail.

Outgoing and incoming messages are stored on the mail server.

A mail server contains a mailbox with incoming messages for the user.

A mail server contains a message queue of outgoing mail messages.

SMTP is the protocol between mail servers to send email messages.

In SMTP, the sending mail server acts as a client.

In SMTP, the receiving mail server acts as a server.

SMTP uses TCP to reliably transfer email messages from client to server.

SMTP operates on port 25.

SMTP performs direct transfer from the sending server to the receiving server.

The three phases of SMTP transfer are handshaking, transfer of messages, and closure.

SMTP uses command and response interaction like HTTP.

SMTP commands are ASCII text.

SMTP responses are a status code and phrase.

SMTP messages must be in 7-bit ASCII.

Alice uses her user agent to compose an email message to Bob.

Alice's user agent sends the message to her mail server where it is placed in a message queue.

The client side of SMTP opens a TCP connection with Bob's mail server.

The SMTP client sends Alice's message over the TCP connection.

Bob's mail server places the message in Bob's mailbox.

Bob invokes his user agent to read the message.

SMTP commands include HELO, MAIL FROM, RCPT TO, DATA, and QUIT.

If Bob uses Web-based email, the user agent uses HTTP or HTTPS to retrieve Bob's email.

This requires Bob's mail server to have an HTTP or HTTPS interface as well as an SMTP interface.

The alternative method for retrieving email is Internet Mail Access Protocol defined in RFC 3501.

Both HTTP and IMAP allow Bob to manage folders maintained in Bob's mail server.

Bob can move messages into folders, delete messages, and mark messages as important.

P2P applications have no always-on server.

In P2P, arbitrary end systems directly communicate.

In P2P, peers request service from other peers and provide service in return.

P2P has self scalability because new peers bring new service capacity and new service demands.

In P2P, peers are intermittently connected and change IP addresses.

P2P has complex management.

Examples of P2P applications include BitTorrent for file sharing and Skype for VoIP.

Distribution time is the time to distribute a file of size F from one server to N peers.

Peer upload and download capacity is a limited resource.

In client-server file distribution, the server must send N file copies.

Time to send one copy in client-server is F divided by the server upload capacity.

Time to send N copies in client-server is NF divided by the server upload capacity.

Each client must download a file copy in client-server distribution.

Minimum client download time is F divided by the minimum client download rate.

Client-server distribution time increases linearly in N.

In P2P file distribution, the server must upload at least one copy.

Time to send one copy in P2P is F divided by the server upload capacity.

In P2P, clients as an aggregate must download NF bits.

The maximum upload rate in P2P is the server upload capacity plus the sum of peer upload capacities.

P2P distribution time increases linearly in N but so does the service capacity as each peer brings capacity.

The root cause of the minimum distribution time can be the server, a client, or the combined upload of clients and server.

POP3 is a pull protocol.

SMTP is a push protocol.

The Internet is made up of many pieces and the network is complex, so protocol layers are required.

Protocol layers enable modularisation which eases maintenance.

Protocol layers ease updating of systems.

Protocol layers make change of implementation of a layer's service transparent to the rest of the system.

The two Internet protocol layers are the TCP/IP layer and the OSI layer.

The TCP/IP layer is widely used in the Internet.

The OSI layer is only a reference model.

The TCP/IP layer is made up of 5 layers.

The application layer supports network apps such as FTP, SMTP, and HTTP.

The transport layer handles process data transfer using TCP and UDP.

The network layer handles routing of packets from source to destination using IP and routing protocols.

The data link layer handles data transfer between neighboring network elements such as WiFi.

The physical layer handles bits on the wire.

The OSI layer differs from the TCP/IP layer with two additional layers.

The presentation layer allows applications to interpret meaning of data such as encryption, compression, and machine-specific conventions.

The session layer handles synchronization, check pointing, and recovery of data exchange.

Transport services provide logical communication between app processes running on different hosts.

Transport protocols run in end systems.

On the send side, transport protocols break app messages into segments and pass them to the network layer.

On the receive side, transport protocols reassemble segments into messages and pass them to the app layer.

More than one transport protocol is available to apps.

The Internet transport protocols are TCP and UDP.

TCP provides reliable, in-order delivery.

TCP is connection-oriented.

TCP provides connection management, loss and error recovery, flow control, and congestion control.

UDP provides unreliable, unordered delivery.

UDP is a no-frills extension of best-effort IP.

UDP is a connectionless protocol.

UDP is unreliable with no sequencing or flow control.

UDP has no congestion control.

UDP has low overhead.

A TCP socket is identified by a 4-tuple of source IP address, source port number, dest IP address, and dest port number.

The receiving host uses all four values to direct a segment to the appropriate socket.

A server host may support many simultaneous TCP sockets.

Each socket is identified by its own 4-tuple.

Web servers have different sockets for each connecting client.

Non-persistent HTTP will have a different socket for each request.

TCP is point-to-point with one sender and one receiver.

TCP provides a reliable, in-order byte stream with no message boundaries.

TCP is pipelined with congestion and flow control setting window size.

TCP uses send and receive buffers.

TCP provides full duplex data with bi-directional data flow in the same connection.

MSS stands for maximum segment size.

TCP is connection-oriented with open, data exchange, and close phases.

TCP provides flow control and congestion control.

The TCP header includes source port and dest port fields.

The TCP header includes a sequence number and acknowledgement number.

The TCP header includes control flags such as URG, ACK, PSH, RST, SYN, and FIN.

URG indicates urgent data at the urgent offset pointer.

ACK indicates acknowledgement present and field valid.

PSH means send now, don't buffer.

RST means reset connection or connection request rejected.

SYN is the connection setup synchronize flag.

FIN is the release connection flag.

TCP options include maximum segment size, window scale factor, selective repeat, and time stamp.

Sequence numbers are the byte stream number of the first byte in a segment's data.

ACKs are the sequence number of the next byte expected from the other side.

TCP uses cumulative ACKs.

The TCP spec does not say how the receiver handles out-of-order segments, leaving it up to the implementer.

TCP creates a reliable service on top of IP's unreliable service.

TCP uses pipelined segments.

TCP uses a single retransmission timer.

Retransmissions are triggered by timeout events and duplicate ACKs.

The TCP sender creates a segment with a sequence number when data is received from the app.

The TCP sender starts a timer if not already running.

The expiration interval is TimeOutInterval.

On timeout, TCP retransmits the segment that caused the timeout and restarts the timer.

On receiving an ACK, TCP updates what is known to be acked and starts a timer if there are outstanding segments.

SendBase is the sequence number of the oldest unacknowledged byte.

Fast retransmit resends a segment before the timer expires.

If the sender receives 3 ACKs for the same data, it supposes the segment after the ACKed data was lost.

TCP sender and receiver establish a connection before exchanging data segments.

TCP connection establishment initializes TCP variables such as sequence numbers, buffers, and flow control info.

The client is the connection initiator.

The server is contacted by the client.

The three-way handshake uses SYN, SYNACK, and ACK segments.

Step 1 of the three-way handshake is the client sending a TCP SYN segment to the server specifying the initial sequence number.

Step 2 of the three-way handshake is the server receiving SYN and replying with a SYNACK segment.

Step 3 of the three-way handshake is the client receiving SYNACK and replying with an ACK segment.

Closing a connection uses FIN and ACK control segments.

Step 1 of closing a connection is the client sending a TCP FIN control segment to the server.

Step 2 of closing a connection is the server receiving FIN and replying with an ACK.

Step 3 of closing a connection is the client receiving FIN and replying with an ACK, entering timed wait.

Step 4 of closing a connection is the server receiving ACK and the connection being closed.

Flow control uses algorithms to prevent the sender from overrunning the receiver with information.

Congestion control uses algorithms to prevent the sender from overloading the network.

The goal of flow control and congestion control mechanisms is different but the implementation is combined.

TCP implements sliding window flow control.

The receive side of a TCP connection has a receive buffer or receive window.

Flow control matches the send rate to the receiving app's drain rate.

The receiver advertises spare room by including the value of RcvWindow in segments.

The sender limits unACKed data to RcvWindow.

Sending acknowledgements is separated from setting the window size at the sender.

Acknowledgements do not automatically increase the window size.

Acknowledgements are cumulative.

Congestion occurs when too many sources send too much data too fast for the network to handle.

Congestion control is different from flow control.

Various approaches to congestion control include proactive, reactive end-to-end, and reactive network-assisted.

Effects of congestion include increased delays as queues get longer.

Effects of congestion include packet loss as buffers get full.

Lost packets result in retransmissions which makes congestion worse.

TCP uses slow start on connection establishment and after segment loss or 3 ACKs for a segment.

Congestion window is dynamically sized and responds to network state.

When a connection begins, CongWin equals 1 MSS.

With each ACK received in time, CongWin increases exponentially fast.

TCP continues using the window size unless a problem occurs such as timeout or triple ACK.

TCP increases rate exponentially until the first loss event.

UDP has no connection establishment which can add delay.

UDP is simple with no connection state at sender and receiver.

UDP has a small segment header.

UDP has no congestion control and can blast away as fast as desired.

The UDP header includes source port, destination port, length, and checksum.

UDP is simple and connectionless datagram based.

UDP is lightweight with low overheads.

UDP is easy to program with few primitives and simple sequences.

UDP is unreliable and datagrams can be lost because no implicit acknowledgments are used.

UDP datagrams can be duplicated because there is no sequence number.

UDP works at the transport layer and incorporates ports as part of the address.

UDP provides process to process communication.

Typical uses of UDP include low-latency messaging where speed or low overhead is more important than reliability.

Typical uses of UDP include services which require broadcasting such as service advertisement.

Typical uses of UDP include local services where some message loss can be tolerated.

Examples of UDP use include ticker services, heartbeat, and time-of-day services.

Trivial File Transfer Protocol is an example of UDP use for low-latency and low-overhead file transfer.

TFTP is typically used to transmit small files like router configuration files.

TFTP provides basic error recovery in case a datagram is lost.

TFTP works because it is used in LANs and the files are typically very small.

Service advertisement is an example of UDP use where broadcast is needed and messages are repeated periodically.

In service advertisement, if a datagram is lost there is no recovery.

Service advertisement works because advertisements are sent periodically so messages are individually dispensable.

Two end-to-end transport protocols have been defined: TCP and UDP.

TCP is a connection-oriented protocol.

TCP ensures end-to-end data reliability.

TCP uses segmentation and reassembly.

TCP handles flow control and congestion control.

UDP is a connectionless protocol.

UDP is unreliable with no sequencing or flow control.

UDP has no congestion control.

UDP has low overhead.

A channel access method allows several terminals connected to the same multi-point transmission medium to transmit over it and share its capacity.

Examples of shared physical media are wireless networks, bus networks, ring networks, and half-duplex point-to-point links.

Two primary access control methods exist for computers to communicate over the network.

The two primary access control methods are token-based access and Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection.

Token-based access is used in bus and ring network topologies.

Each computer in a token network can only send its data if it has the token.

Token-based access prevents collisions that occur when data is sent at the same time over the network.

The token is a special pattern of bits in a frame that is directly detectable by each node in the network.

A computer may only transmit information if it is in possession of the token.

The message is sent to all other computers in the network in token-based access.

CSMA/CD is usually used in a bus topology.

CSMA/CD is used in Ethernet LANs.

In CSMA/CD, all nodes can send whenever they have data to transmit.

When a node wants to transmit information in CSMA/CD, it first listens to the network.

If no one is transmitting over the network, the node begins transmission in CSMA/CD.

It is possible for two nodes to transmit simultaneously thinking that the network is clear.

When two nodes transmit at the same time in CSMA/CD, a collision occurs.

The first station to detect the collision sends a jam signal into the network.

Both nodes back off, wait for a random period of time, and then re-transmit.

The three most popular types of LANs are token ring, Ethernet, and FDDI.

FDDI stands for Fiber Distributed Data Interface.

In token ring, an empty frame circulates in the network initially.

In token ring, a node inserts a token in the token bit part of the frame when it wants to send.

In token ring, the node inserts the message and the address of the receiving node in the frame.

In token ring, each node examines the frame and compares the address in the frame to its own address.

When the frame is received by the destination node in token ring, the node copies the message and changes the token bit to 0.

When the source node receives the frame in token ring, it examines the token bit and recognizes that it has been changed to 0.

The source node then empties the frame and releases the empty frame back into the network for circulation.

Ethernet was the first network to provide CSMA/CD.

Ethernet was developed in 1976 by Xerox PARC in cooperation with DEC and Intel.

Ethernet is a fast and reliable network solution.

Ethernet is one of the most widely implemented LAN standards.

Ethernet can provide speeds in the range of 10Mbps to 10 Gbps.

Ethernet is used with a bus or star topology.

10Base-T operates at 10 Mbps and is IEEE 802.3 standard.

Fast Ethernet (100Base-T) operates at 100 Mbps.

Gigabit Ethernet operates at 1 Gbps and uses fiber optic cable.

10 Gbps Ethernet uses fiber optic cable and was developed to meet increasing bandwidth needs.

Wireless Ethernet is IEEE 802.11 standard and operates at around 2.4 Gbps.

FDDI provides a standard for data transmission in a local area network that can extend up to 200 kilometers.

The FDDI protocol uses the token ring protocol as its basis.

FDDI local area networks can support thousands of users.

FDDI uses optical fiber as a standard underlying medium.
FDDI can use copper cable, in which case it is referred to as CDDI.

FDDI uses a dual-attached, counter-rotating token-ring topology.

An FDDI network contains two token rings, one for possible backup in case the primary ring fails.

FDDI has a larger maximum-frame size than standard 100 Mbit/s Ethernet, allowing better throughput.

A small number of devices connect to both rings in FDDI, hence the term dual-attached.

Host computers connect as single-attached devices to routers or concentrators in FDDI.

Internetworking is a scheme for interconnecting multiple networks of dissimilar technologies.

Internetworking uses both hardware and software.

Extra hardware is positioned between networks in internetworking.

Software on each attached computer is part of internetworking.

A system of interconnected networks is called an internetwork or an internet.

Network devices used in internetworking include repeaters, hubs, bridges, switches, and routers.

Functions of network devices include separating or connecting networks and expanding network.

Functions of network devices include remote access.

Networks cannot be made larger by simply adding new computers and more cables.

Components can be installed to segment a large LAN or connect LANs.

Repeaters and hubs work at the OSI physical layer to regenerate the network's signal and resend them to other segments.

A primitive hub can be viewed as a multiport repeater.

A hub regenerates data and broadcasts them to all ports, which is called flooding.

Repeaters cannot join segments with different access methods.

Repeaters do not isolate and filter packets.

Repeaters can connect different types of media.

Repeaters are the most economic way of expanding networks.

A bridge has one input and one output.

Bridges are used to isolate network traffic and computers.

A bridge has the intelligence to examine incoming frame source and destination addresses.

A bridge can reduce traffic on other segments.

A bridge cannot interpret higher-level information.

A bridge cannot filter packets according to protocol.

Bridges work at the Media Access Control Sub-layer of the OSI model, which is Layer 2.

A switching table is built to record the segment number of an address.

The learning phase is when a bridge learns which computers are connected to which segment.

If the destination address is in the same segment as the source address, the bridge stops transmission.

If the destination address is in a different segment, the bridge forwards to the other segment.

Remote bridges can be used to connect remote segments via data-grade telephone line.

Bridges increase the number of attached workstations and network segments.

Bridges are transparent to higher-level protocols because they work at the MAC layer.

Subdividing the LAN into smaller segments increases overall reliability and makes the network easier to maintain.

Some bridges are fault tolerant and can isolate faulty segments and reconfigure paths in the event of failure.

Bridges are not efficient with complex networks.

Broadcasts are forwarded to every connected network segment by bridges.

The buffering of frames introduces network delays in bridges.

Bridges may overload during periods of high traffic.

The self-learning capability of a bridge raises the potential of network loops in networks with many bridges.

A loop presents conflicting information on which segment a specific address is located.

Repeaters work at the physical layer while bridges work at the data link layer.

Repeaters regenerate data at the signal level while bridges regenerate data at the packet level.

Repeaters do not reduce network traffic while bridges do reduce network traffic.

Switches operate at the Data Link layer, which is Layer 2 of the OSI model.

Switches can interpret address information.

Switches resemble bridges and can be considered as multiport bridges.

Switches can better use limited bandwidth and prove more cost-effective than bridges.

Switches divide a network into several isolated channels.

Frames sent from one channel will not go to another channel unless specified.

Each channel in a switch has its own capacity and need not be shared with other channels.

Switches reduce the possibility of collision.

Collision in a switch only occurs when two devices try to get access to one channel.

Collision in a switch can be solved by buffering one of the devices for later access.

Switches are suitable for real-time applications such as video conferencing.

Switches are secure because data will only go to the destination and not to others.

Switches can become overwhelmed by heavy traffic despite containing buffers.

A switch cannot detect collision when the buffer is full.

CSMA/CD scheme will not work in switches since data channels are isolated.

Some higher-level protocols do not detect error, such as UDP.

Data packets are continuously pumped to the switch and introduce more problems.

Switches have two basic architectures: cut-through and store-and-forward.

Cut-through examines the destination MAC address only before forwarding.

Store-and-forward accepts and analyzes the entire frame before forwarding.

Store-and-forward allows the switch to catch certain errors and keep them from propagating.

Cut-through reads the first 14 bytes of each packet and then transmits.

Cut-through is much faster but cannot detect corrupt packets.

Cut-through can propagate corrupt packets to the network.

Cut-through is best suited to small workgroups.

Store-and-forward reads the whole packet before transmitting.

Store-and-forward is slower than cut-through mode.

Store-and-forward is more accurate since corrupt packets can be detected using the FCS.

Store-and-forward is more suited to large LANs since they will not propagate error frames.

Store-and-forward facilitates data transfer between segments of different speed.

Switches can logically group together some ports to form a virtual local area network.

VLAN stands for virtual local area network.

Routers work at the OSI layer 3, which is the network layer.

Routers use the logical address of packets and routing tables to determine the best path for data delivery.

As packets are passed from router to router, data link layer source and destination addresses are stripped off and then recreated.

A router can route a packet between two dissimilar technologies.

Only packets with known network addresses will be passed by a router, hence reducing traffic.

Routers can listen to a network and identify its busiest part.

Routers will select the most cost-effective path for transmitting packets.

Routing tables are formed based on communications between routers using routing protocols.

Routing protocols collect data about current network status and contribute to selection of the best path.

Routers by default will not forward any broadcast or multicast packets.

Routers use the logical address in a network layer header to determine the next hop router.

Routers can use access lists to control security on packets trying to enter or exit an interface.

Two routing protocols are RIP and OSPF.

RIP stands for Routing Information Protocol.

OSPF stands for Open Shortest Path First.

RIP uses the number of hops between nodes to determine the best path.

RIP does not consider network congestion condition.

RIP broadcasts every 30 seconds the routing table to neighbouring routers.

RIP is limited to interpreting a maximum of 16 hops.

RIP is not suitable for large networks such as the Internet.

RIP can create excessive network traffic due to broadcasting.

RIP may take a long time to reach the far reaches.

OSPF makes up the limitations of RIP and can coexist with RIP.

In general, best path in OSPF refers to the shortest path.

In case of traffic congestion, OSPF can go a longer path.

Each router in OSPF maintains a database of other router's links.

If a link failure notice is received, OSPF router can rapidly compute an alternate path.

OSPF requires more memory and CPU power.

Static routers use manual configuration of routes.

Dynamic routers use manual configuration of the first route and automatic discovery of new routes.

Static routers always use the same route.

Dynamic routers can select the best route.

Static routers are more secure.

Dynamic routers need manual configuration to improve security.

Bridges forward everything they don't recognize.

Routers select the best path.

Routers are layer 3 devices which recognize network address.

Bridges are layer 2 devices which look at the MAC sublayer node address.

Layer-3 switches operate in both layer 2 and layer 3.

Layer-3 switches can perform both MAC switching and IP routing.

A layer-3 switch is a combination of switch and router but much faster and easier to configure than a router.

Repeaters are the least expensive way to expand a network but are limited to interconnecting five segments.

Bridges function similar to repeaters but can understand the node addresses.

Switches can be considered as multiport bridges and can divide a network into some logical channels.

Routers interconnect networks and provide filtering functions and can determine the best route.

There is always a finite delay for a signal to propagate from one end of a transmission medium to the other end.

This delay is known as the transmission delay, Tp, of the medium.

In the best circumstance, signals propagate through free space at the speed of light, which is 3x10^8 m/s.

Data is normally transmitted in blocks of bits called frames.

On receipt of a block, an acknowledgement of correct or otherwise receipt is returned to the sender.

Round-trip delay is the time delay between the first bit of a frame being transmitted and the last bit of its associated acknowledgement being received.

Multiplexing is the process used to combine multiple signals for transmission over a single media.

The device that performs multiplexing is called a Multiplexor (MUX).

Signals multiplexed at the sender's end should be demultiplexed at the receiver's end.

Multiplexing and Demultiplexing go in pair.

Multiplexing allows two or more simultaneous transmissions on a single circuit.

Multiplexing is transparent to the end user.

Multiplexing costs less.

Current multiplexing techniques include Frequency Division Multiplexing, Time Division Multiplexing, Synchronous versus Statistical, Wavelength Division Multiplexing, and Code Division Multiplexing.

FDM is the assignment of non-overlapping frequency ranges to each user or signal on a medium.

FDM is a form of signal multiplexing where multiple baseband signals are modulated on different frequency carrier waves.

In FDM, all signals are transmitted at the same time, each using different frequencies.

A multiplexor accepts inputs and assigns frequencies to each device in FDM.

TDM is a method of putting multiple data streams in a single signal by separating the signal into many segments of very short duration.

In TDM, each individual data stream is reassembled at the receiving end based on timing.


TDM shares the signal by dividing the available transmission time on a medium among the users.

TDM is exclusively used for digital signaling.

TDM comes in two basic forms: synchronous and statistical or asynchronous.


Synchronous TDM accepts input in a round-robin fashion.

Synchronous TDM transmits data in a never-ending pattern.

ISDN telephone lines are common examples of synchronous TDM.

Synchronous TDM line requires as much bandwidth as all the bandwidths of the sources.

Asynchronous or Statistical TDM accepts incoming data streams and creates a frame containing only the data to be transmitted.

Asynchronous TDM transmits only data from active workstations so no space is wasted.

Asynchronous TDM is used for LANs.

A statistical multiplexor does not require a high-speed line because it does not assume all sources will transmit all of the time.

Statistical TDM is good for low bandwidth lines and is used for LANs.

Statistical TDM is a much more efficient use of bandwidth.

WDM stands for Wavelength Division Multiplexing.

WDM multiplexes multiple optical carrier signals on a single optical fiber by using different wavelengths of laser light.

WDM allows for a multiplication in capacity and enables bidirectional communications over one strand of fiber.

WDM gives each message a different wavelength.

WDM is easy to do with fiber optics and optical sources.

WDM is often called Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing.

WDM multiplexes multiple data streams onto a single fiber optic line.

Different wavelength lasers called lambdas transmit the multiple signals in WDM.

Each signal carried on the fiber in WDM can be transmitted at a different rate.

CDM stands for Code Division Multiplexing.

CDM is also known as Code Division Multiple Access.

CDM allows multiple devices to transmit on the same frequencies at the same time using different codes.

CDM is used for mobile communications.

Frequency Division Multiplexing is simple but works for analog signals only.

Synchronous Time Division Multiplexing is popular with radio, TV, and cable TV and is relatively inexpensive.

Synchronous TDM is limited by frequency ranges.

Statistical Time Division Multiplexing works for digital signals and is relatively simple.

Statistical TDM is commonly used with T-1 and ISDN but wastes bandwidth.

Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing is a more efficient use of bandwidth and packets can be various sizes.

Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing is more complex than synchronous TDM.

Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing provides very high capacities over fiber and is scalable.

Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing has cost and complexity disadvantages.

Code Division Multiplexing provides large capacities and is scalable but has complexity disadvantages.

Pure ALOHA, slotted ALOHA, CSMA, and CSMA/CD are contention-based protocols.

Contention-based protocols try to transmit, and if a collision occurs, they retry with no guarantee of performance.

Collision-free protocols pay constant attention to overhead to achieve performance guarantees.

Collision-free protocols are good when network load is high.

In Pure ALOHA, a node transmits whenever it has data.

In Pure ALOHA, if a conflict occurs, the node waits for a random time and retries.

Slotted ALOHA divides time into slots with one frame per slot.


Slotted ALOHA sends only at the time slot boundary.

Slotted ALOHA has a maximum throughput two times higher than Pure ALOHA.

Slotted ALOHA has less chance to collide.

CSMA stands for Carrier Sense Multiple Access.

Carrier sense means listen to the carrier and act accordingly.

Types of CSMA include persistent, non-persistent, and p-persistent.

In persistent CSMA, a station listens first and sends if no one is there.

In persistent CSMA, if the channel is busy, the station waits and keeps listening until it becomes idle.

Propagation delay is a factor that affects the performance of CSMA.

In non-persistent CSMA, a station listens first and sends if no one is there.

In non-persistent CSMA, if the channel is busy, the station waits a random period of time and repeats.

In p-persistent CSMA, the channel is slotted.

In p-persistent CSMA, if the channel is idle, the station sends with probability p.

In p-persistent CSMA, if the channel is busy, the station waits for a random time and repeats.

Propagation delay has an important effect on the performance of the protocol.

There is a small chance that just after a station begins sending, another station will become ready to send and sense the channel.

If the first station's signal has not yet reached the second one, the latter will sense an idle channel and also begin sending, resulting in a collision.

The longer the propagation delay, the worse the performance of the protocol.

Even if the propagation delay is zero, there will still be collisions.

If two stations become ready in the middle of a third station's transmission, both will wait until the transmission ends and then both will begin transmitting 
exactly simultaneously, resulting in a collision.

Collisions can still occur during the contention period in CSMA/CD.

Collisions during the contention period adversely affect system performance, especially when the cable is long and the frames are short.

CSMA/CD is not universally applicable.

Collision-free protocols resolve contention for the channel without any collisions, not even during the contention period.

Collision-free protocols assume there are exactly N stations.

Collision-free protocols assume each station has a unique address from 0 to N-1 wired into the network.

Collision-free protocols assume propagation delay is negligible.

Two collision-free protocols are the bit-map method and binary countdown.

In the bit-map protocol, each contention period consists of exactly N slots.

In the bit-map protocol, station j may announce it has a frame to send by inserting a 1 bit into slot j.

In the bit-map protocol, after all N slots have passed, each station has complete knowledge of which stations wish to transmit.

In the bit-map protocol, stations begin transmitting in numerical order.

In the bit-map protocol, since everyone agrees on who goes next, there will never be any collisions.

In the bit-map protocol, after the last ready station has transmitted, another N-bit contention period is begun.

In the bit-map protocol, if a station becomes ready just after its bit slot has passed, it must remain silent until the bit map comes around again.

Protocols in which the desire to transmit is broadcast before the actual transmission are called reservation protocols.

The bit-map protocol has a channel utilization rate of d/(d+1) for high load.

The bit-map protocol has N bits delay for low load.

A problem with the basic bit-map protocol is that the overhead is 1 bit per station, so it does not scale well to networks with thousands of stations.

Binary countdown uses binary station addresses.

In binary countdown, a station wanting to use the channel broadcasts its address as a binary bit string, starting with the high-order bit.

In binary countdown, all addresses are assumed to be the same length.

In binary countdown, the bits in each address position from different stations are BOOLEAN ORed together.

Binary countdown implicitly assumes that transmission delays are negligible.

In binary countdown, as soon as a station sees that a high-order bit position that is 0 in its address has been overwritten with a 1, it gives up.

Binary countdown has a channel utilization rate of d/(d+log(N)) for high load.

Binary countdown has log(N) bits delay for low load.

In binary countdown, the contention field can serve as the address field.

Collision-based protocols are good when the network load is low.

Collision-free protocols are good when the network load is high.

Limited contention protocols combine the advantages of collision-based and collision-free protocols.

Limited contention protocols behave like the ALOHA scheme under light load.

Limited contention protocols behave like the bitmap scheme under heavy load.

Routing is the process of selecting a path in a network along which to send data packets.

Routers use routing tables to determine the best path.

Static routing uses manually configured routes.

Dynamic routing uses routing protocols to update routing tables automatically.

Default routing forwards packets to a default route when no specific path is available.

A routing protocol is a set of rules that defines how routers communicate and share routing information.

Key functions of routing protocols include path determination, topology discovery, route maintenance, and convergence.

Path determination is the process of selecting the best path for forwarding data packets from source to destination.

Path determination uses metrics such as hop count, bandwidth, delay, and cost to evaluate possible routes.

A metric is a numerical value used by routing protocols to determine the best path for forwarding data packets.

OSPF uses Dijkstra's Algorithm for path selection.

RIP uses the Bellman-Ford Algorithm for path selection.

Topology discovery is when routers exchange information to understand the network's structure.

Distance Vector protocols rely on periodic table updates.

Link-State protocols build a complete map of the network.

Topology discovery helps routers detect network changes such as new routers and link failures.

Route maintenance ensures that routing tables remain updated and accurate.

If a network change occurs, routing protocols recalculate paths.

EIGRP uses the Diffusing Update Algorithm to maintain backup routes for quick failover.

Convergence is the process by which all routers update and synchronize their routing tables after a topology change.

Faster convergence is critical to minimize downtime and prevent routing loops.

OSPF converges faster than RIP because it updates only changes instead of sending full tables.

A routing protocol defines how routers communicate and share information.

A routing algorithm determines the best path based on a defined metric.

Examples of routing protocols include RIP, OSPF, EIGRP, and BGP.

Examples of routing algorithms include Dijkstra's Algorithm, Bellman-Ford Algorithm, and Floyd-Warshall Algorithm.

A routing protocol operates at a higher level, managing how routers interact.

A routing algorithm works internally within a protocol to compute paths.

Categories of routing protocols include Distance Vector and Link-State.

Distance Vector routing protocols use hop count as the metric for choosing the best path.

Distance Vector routers share entire routing tables with neighbours at intervals.

Examples of Distance Vector protocols include RIP and IGRP.

RIP has a maximum of 15 hops, making it suitable for small networks.

RIP v1 does not support subnet masks and is classful.

RIP v2 supports subnet masks and is classless.

IGRP is a Cisco proprietary protocol that uses bandwidth and delay as metrics.

Hop count is a routing metric representing the number of routers a packet must pass through to reach its destination.

Hop count does not count the current router where the packet is being processed.

Link-State routing protocols have each router maintain a full map of the network topology.

Link-State routers exchange link-state advertisements instead of full routing tables.

Examples of Link-State protocols include OSPF and IS-IS.

OSPF uses Dijkstra's algorithm for shortest path calculation.

OSPF supports hierarchical design with areas and Area 0 as the backbone.

IS-IS is similar to OSPF but used in large ISP networks.

Hybrid routing protocols combine features of both Distance Vector and Link-State protocols.

EIGRP is a Cisco proprietary hybrid protocol.

EIGRP uses the Diffusing Update Algorithm for fast convergence.

EIGRP maintains a backup route called a feasible successor in addition to the primary route.

When the primary route becomes unavailable, the backup route can immediately take over, minimizing convergence time.

EIGRP supports unequal-cost load balancing.

Unequal-cost load balancing distributes traffic across multiple paths with different costs.

Common metrics used by routing protocols include hop count, bandwidth, delay, and cost.

Hop count is used by RIP.

Bandwidth is used by OSPF and EIGRP.

Delay is used by EIGRP.

Cost is a combination of two or more metrics and is used by OSPF.

Convergence is the time taken for routers to update their routing tables after a topology change.

Faster convergence is preferred to minimize downtime.

Distance Vector protocols such as RIP and IGRP have slower convergence.

Link-State protocols such as OSPF and IS-IS have faster convergence.

Hybrid protocols such as EIGRP balance speed and efficiency.

Interior routing takes place within an organization.

Interior routing uses protocols like OSPF, EIGRP, RIP, and IS-IS for routing between internal routers.

Exterior routing manages communication between organizations or ISPs.

Exterior routing uses BGP for interconnecting autonomous systems.

Interior Gateway Protocols are used inside an autonomous system.

Examples of Interior Gateway Protocols include RIP, OSPF, EIGRP, and IS-IS.

Interior Gateway Protocols are used in corporate and enterprise networks.

Exterior Gateway Protocols are used between autonomous systems.

BGP is an Exterior Gateway Protocol.

Exterior Gateway Protocols are used by Internet Service Providers.

Baud is how many times a signal changes per second.

Bit rate is how many bits can be sent per time unit, usually per second.

Bit rate is controlled by baud and the number of signal levels.

Digital data and digital signal is one of four possible combinations of encoding techniques.

Analog data and digital signal is one of four possible combinations of encoding techniques.

Digital data and analog signal is one of four possible combinations of encoding techniques.

Analog data and analog signal is one of four possible combinations of encoding techniques.

A digital signal consists of discrete, discontinuous voltage pulses.

Each pulse in a digital signal is a signal element.

Binary data is encoded into signal elements.

Unipolar means all signal elements have the same sign.

Polar means one logic state is represented by positive voltage and the other by negative voltage.

Data rate is the rate of data transmission in bits per second.

Duration or length of a bit is the time taken for the transmitter to emit the bit.

Modulation rate is the rate at which the signal level changes.

Modulation rate is measured in baud, which equals signal elements per second.

Mark is binary 1 and space is binary 0.

Interpreting signals requires knowing the timing of bits, when they start and end, and the signal levels.

Factors affecting successful interpreting of signals include signal to noise ratio, data rate, and bandwidth.

Signal spectrum, clocking, error detection, signal interference and noise immunity, and cost and complexity are compared for encoding schemes.

Lack of high frequencies reduces required bandwidth.

Lack of dc component allows ac coupling via transformer, providing isolation.

Concentrating power in the middle of the bandwidth is a consideration for encoding schemes.

Clocking synchronizes transmitter and receiver.

Clocking can use an external clock or a sync mechanism based on the signal.

Error detection can be built into signal encoding.

Some codes are better than others for signal interference and noise immunity.

Higher signal rate and thus data rate lead to higher costs.

Some codes require signal rate greater than data rate.

Encoding schemes include Nonreturn to Zero-Level, Nonreturn to Zero Inverted, Bipolar-AMI, Pseudoternary, Manchester, and Differential Manchester.

Return to zero signal amplitude varies between a positive voltage and zero.

In Return to zero, binary 1 is a constant positive voltage.

In Return to zero, binary 0 is absence of voltage or ground.

In NRZ-L, two different voltages are used for 0 and 1 bits.

In NRZ-L, voltage is constant during the bit interval with no transition and no return to zero voltage.

In NRZI, a constant voltage pulse is used for the duration of the bit.

In NRZI, data is encoded as presence or absence of signal transition at the beginning of bit time.

In NRZI, a transition denotes a binary 1 and no transition denotes a binary 0.

NRZI is an example of differential encoding.

In differential encoding, data is represented by changes rather than levels.

Differential encoding is more reliable for detection of transition rather than level.

In complex transmission layouts, it is easy to lose sense of polarity.

NRZ pros include being easy to engineer and making good use of bandwidth.

NRZ cons include a dc component and lack of synchronization capability.

NRZ is used for magnetic recording but not often used for signal transmission.

Multilevel binary uses more than two levels.

Bipolar-AMI represents zero by no line signal.

Bipolar-AMI represents one by positive or negative pulse.

In Bipolar-AMI, binary 1 pulses alternate in polarity.

Bipolar-AMI benefits include no loss of sync if a long string of ones, no net dc component, lower bandwidth, and easy error detection.

Pseudoternary represents binary 1 by absence of line signal.

Pseudoternary represents binary 0 by alternating positive and negative.

Pseudoternary has no advantage or disadvantage over bipolar-AMI.

Pseudoternary has no loss of sync if a long string of zeros.

Multilevel binary is not as efficient as NRZ because each signal element only represents one bit.

In a 3 level system, each signal element could represent log base 2 of 3, which is 1.58 bits.

The receiver must distinguish between three levels (+A, -A, 0) instead of two in NRZ.

Multilevel binary requires approximately 3dB more signal power for the same probability of bit error.

Biphase techniques include Manchester and Differential Manchester.

Manchester encoding has a transition at the middle of each bit period.

In Manchester encoding, the transition serves as clock and data.

In Manchester encoding, low to high represents binary 1.

In Manchester encoding, high to low represents binary 0.

Manchester encoding is used by IEEE 802.3 Ethernet.

In Differential Manchester, there is always a transition in the middle of the interval.

In Differential Manchester, a transition at the beginning of the interval represents binary 0.

In Differential Manchester, no transition at the beginning of the interval represents binary 1.

Differential Manchester is a differential encoding scheme.

Differential Manchester is used by IEEE 802.5 token ring LAN.

Manchester encoding has at least one transition per bit time and possibly two.

Manchester encoding has a maximum modulation rate that is twice NRZ.

Manchester encoding requires more bandwidth.

Manchester pros include synchronization on mid bit transition which is self clocking.

Manchester pros include no dc component.

Manchester pros include error detection by absence of expected transition.